Type 3: Outside Track

This next strategy - the Outside Track - is really straight forward, but often one of the most challenging to execute well. When we're asking the question about what matters on this type of day, the answer will generally be that there is a "place to race to." This scenario generally sets up with a pressure gradient across the course, a current gradient, or a persistent shift, and the farther you get to the favored side, the more you'll gain.

If you suspect that a condition might create a place to race to, work hard with a training partner to split tacks before the start, build confidence in the favored side, and then take advantage of your confidence by making a plan that will get you into the favored side. Often an advantage on outside track days can be found in the first race of the day by being the first boat to commit to the outside track while others are trying to be conservative by tacking shy of layline.

If you're not the first boat to lead to the favored side, boats ahead of you will probably start tacking out of the favored side, and the question that you need to be asking is, "Is there room to play through?" Often opportunities present themselves when leaders tack to cross the fleet without going all the way to layline. If those boats have gone shy, leaving space on their hip, look to play through to get closer to the side that you know will keep paying. Your challenge will be avoiding bad air, so knowing how to manage blockers - a topic we'll cover in the tactics segment - will be really important here.

In a dying breeze, look for the outside track to pay - be patient on your side, and play it out to the last of the breeze. Common in stable, light air conditions, and/or fading, stable breeze.

Starting

Starting near the favored side of the course generally outweighs other considerations in the outside track, but if it's obvious that the left is favored, sometimes it's better to be 1/3 of the way up from the pin end of the line to avoid the crowd. If the right side is favored, don't be afraid to fight hard to win the boat end. Plan B options are generally pretty good when this is the case, so it's a good moment to really get in the fight and take a big risk with a relatively low consequence if you get it wrong. Ultimately, on outside track days, success on the starting line is best measured by looking one minute up the beat, at whether you are in a good lane going to the favored side.

First Tack

In an outside track situation, one of the keys is to minimize maneuvers, so if you've executed a plan A start, hopefully you'll be drag racing into the corner, and tacking as close to lay line as you dare.

Plan B

If you find yourself in plan B on the outside track, you'll have your work cut out for you, so one of the most important things you can do right away is to adopt a mindset that the goal is to not lose any more rather than trying to bet big or split and lose even more. The plan B from the outside track is one of the most difficult strategies to execute because generally if there is a place to race to, the leaders will lock down all of the lanes in that direction. The big judgment call here, is how far to go to get a better lane, versus how favored that side is. The most common mistake that I see people make is to abandon the favored side completely to try to get to a big open lane. The more you practice this, the better you'll get at knowing where the happy medium lies for a given condition, but one thing that can help is to remember that you're racing the boats immediately around you - not the people 2 boat lengths ahead. The rich often get richer on outside track courses, so if you can hold your ground and let other people take themselves out, you'll be doing alright.

Your goal is to get back onto the tack that takes you to the favored side as soon as possible after the start so keep your head out of the boat for sneaky lanes as you bail out, and remember that in extreme cases, it may be worth sailing in bad air to get to the favored side. One thing that is super important in this condition is to discuss the plan B ahead of time so that you know how good your lane needs to be incase you don't have a Plan A start.

When you find yourself executing a plan B outside track, look for passing lanes that might not exist in other conditions by sailing slightly past layline. Oftentimes, the fleet will play the laylines like a normal beat, tacking shy and leaving clear air just beyond lay, especially early in the day. This can pay big if you get to take advantage of the favored condition in clear air, however, the more obvious it becomes as the day goes on, the less likely it is to pay.

Downwind

In outside track conditions, there is generally a place to race to downwind, whether that is pressure, favorable current, better sea state, or whatever made it an outside track course upwind. Interestingly, in apparent wind boats, current plays a much smaller role downwind than upwind, because it has a big impact on apparent wind in addition to speed over ground. On outside track courses, look to play it out to the favorable corner and gybe late if there are any lanes to make that happen. A lot of times you can gain if the fleet gets sucked into the typical jumping duel downwind, and you just stay clear and extend into the corner.

Second Beat

The second beat on outside track race courses is all about lane management. In general, when there is a place to race to, the fleet will figure out the formula by the second lap around the course, so the leaders will take the best lanes to the favored side. If you find yourself in this lead group, life is easy! Take the gate that allows you to head to the favored side, or think about hedging your bet a little bit by rounding the opposite mark and tacking if you have a little bit of lead to burn.

Where the second beat gets challenging is when you find yourself behind, looking for a lane to get to the favored side. In this case, two rules of thumb can help you make the right decision around the gate. First, focus on the boats on or near your ladder rung. Figure out who you are racing against, and ignore the boats significantly ahead. At this point in the race, on an outside track race course, the rich tend to get richer, so trying to get the same quality of lane as the boats in the pack ahead of you is often a recipe for losing out to the boats nearby. Instead, you're looking for a lane that is about as good as the boats that you're racing against that takes you to the favored side.

The second rule of thumb is: focus on traffic at the leeward gate. If you're all by yourself coming into the gate, keep things simple and round the gate mark closest to the favored side of the course. This minimizes maneuvers, and puts you to the favored side of your competition immediately out of the gate. Often times however, this gate will be the crowded one, because the fleet will be fighting for the favored side. In this case, the high percentage move is often to round the gate on the unfavored side (especially if the gate itself is favored) and do an extra tack to head the direction that you want to go. The worst case scenario when you find yourself in the middle of the fleet is to round the favored gate in traffic, or behind a pack of boats, causing you to have to take a clearing tack and then an additional tack to get going the right direction.

Depending on your class, and the maneuver loss that you expect from taking extra tacks, it's often useful to think through this whole scenario in terms of the number of meters lost from a left turn or a right turn to get going to the favored side, and then factor in the favor of the gate mark. At the end of the day, the goal is to get going to the side that you like as quickly as possible, with minimal maneuvers, and an equal lane to the boats you're racing against.
