What is Strategy?

As a junior sailor, I consumed all of the sailing books that I could get my hands on. From Stuart Walker's Advanced Racing Tactics, I learned that I needed to minimize major mistakes. From Dave Perry's, Winning In One Designs I learned the importance of switching mindsets from moderate wind assertiveness to light air patience.

At the same time, my high school sailing coach was teaching me important lessons on the race course. "Cross when you can," was a common mantra. Other days the advice would be, "Start in a position to get to the first pressure." Sometimes I would follow the advice and win, and other times I would follow the advice and lose. The more experience I got, the more I began to fit the tactical lessons into some rough categories. If the course was short, it might be more important to start closer to the boat and protect starboard advantage. If the course was long, maybe it didn't matter where I started. In bad fleets I could push the line and use a line-sight to nail my time-on-distance at the start, but in good fleets, I had to start against the fleet.

I started to be able to see how some days were "formula" days, where there was a place to race to, or a formula that just kept working over and over again. If you could figure out the formula on these days, you could just rinse and repeat. Other days, the course was more open, and I realized that it was important to sail the shifts.

I believe that most sailors coming out of Southern California around that time probably had a similar experience, soaking in all of the experience and wisdom of the older racers around us, and trying to make sense of it in our own ways. And it seemed to work! Southern California was the powerhouse of junior sailing in the United States at that time. Sailors from the SCYYRA Race Team or the CISA Sailing team swept the International Orange Bowl on a fairly regular basis. The ISAF Youth World team was disproportionately Californian. The US Youth Championships routinely had Californians standing atop the podium in the 420, 29er, and Laser classes.

But once we moved up to the next level, the game started to break down a little bit. From my generation we had a big cohort of Olympic hopefuls hit the campaign trail and start testing their mettle against the international competition.

Chris Barnard and Charlie Buckingham topped the US Laser contingent. Brianna Provancia, Sydney Bolger and Carly Shevitz battled it out in the 470. Dane Wilson, Nevin Snow, Hans Henken, Judge Ryan, and others trained in the 49er. Paris Henken and Helena Scutt were the first US Olympic representatives in the 49er FX. Caleb Paine won an Olympic Bronze medal in the Finn class in 2016. I did a stint in the 470 and the 49er each.

For each of these teams, I think that there were days of their campaigns when everything seemed to click. We had the speed. We had the moves on the starting line. We had the smarts around the race course. It all came together and we could walk away from a day of racing with great scores. Other days however, it felt like we were banging our heads against the wall.

We were told that this was all part of the learning process, and that with time, we would figure out how to put it all together. But as time went on, it seemed like our international competition learned faster than us. Years one and two of Olympic quadrenniums might show signs of hope - a great result here and there, renewing the faith, and keeping us hungry. But by year three, international teams were firing on all cylinders and while we still had good days every once in a while, the good regattas became fewer and fewer.

Some people pointed to big picture structural issues in funding and organization as the culprit, while others focused on tiny details that might in theory all add up over time.

At the end of the day however, I think it goes back to our foundation of race course decision making. The days that American teams walk away with solid score lines are disproportionately the "formula days," where they figure out what is working, and do the same thing in every race.

When I started coaching full time, the first question that I wanted to answer was, "Do coaches matter?" Were results simply the expression of some natural ability - talent - or were the best coaches somehow cultivating the skills needed to succeed? To me, Victor Kovelenko was the answer to the question. If you haven't read Victor's biography called, The Medal Maker, I recommend it. The book chronicles Victor's training in Ukraine under the soviet system, before moving to Australia and taking the Australian 470 program from a bottom tier program to a double Olympic Gold Medal winning (men's and women's) juggernaut in his first quad with the team. He then proceeded to repeat this success each year until the 2021 Olympics in Tokyo. Undoubtedly, Victor has created a process for learning and improvement in the Australian 470 program, that systematically creates championship capable teams.

When one of Victor's most successful proteges, the most decorated double handed Olympic crew in the history of the sport, Malcolm Paige was hired to lead the US Sailing Team after another bleak quad for the Stars and Stripes in 2016, I was excited for the opportunity to pull back the curtain to find out what it was that made the Aussies so successful. I learned a lot from Malcolm during the time that he ran the team, but one of the most important takeaways was that he always talked about strategy in terms of the type of day.

A critical moment for me was at the 2018 World Sailing Championship in Aarhus, Denmark. As a whole, the US Sailing Team was off to a solid start to the event, but on day two, the wind shifted around to the west - a puffy, shifty wind direction - and across the board, performance plummeted. We were no longer in the "formula" racing sweet spot.

We kept trying to predict which side would pay, but the wind was unpredictable. It wasn't a college sailing, "head out of the boat," style of racing where you sail to what you see up the course. Fundamentally, this racing did not fit into any of the styles of racing that we talked about on a regular basis.

Malcolm identified it as an "edge of the group" type of day, where boats on either edge of a pack would come out ahead, whereas boats in the middle of groups would get burned. He explained the logic of how boats gained or lost in the randomness, and described a strategy designed to maximize performance in a fundamentally unpredictable wind. At that point, I didn't fully grasp the strategy yet, and there were many nuances to work out, but the idea opened my eyes to the power of understanding the type of day, and ensuring that our toolbox contained strategies to address each type of day that we might encounter. This Part of the book will lay out a foundation for thinking about types of day in a way that is both logical and systematic enough to be predictable and repeatable from venue to venue, while also being flexible enough to encompass every scenario that you might encounter on a race course.

When I think back to the cohort of Southern California sailors who I grew up with, I think that we had a lot of the right raw materials to become really great sailors, but ultimately succeeding in today's professional Olympic environment requires a better process for learning, and in the case of race course decision making, a better framework for thinking about strategy. We need a systematic approach that allows us to file away lessons for retrieval at the right time later on. This isn't necessarily a complete decision making system by itself, but it is a scaffolding to organize the wisdom, advice, and lessons learned that we get from coaches, and experience on the race course.

Instead of random tactical thoughts floating around in our heads that create a "gut feeling" which may or may not be correct, this provides a system that we can draw on with more confidence to help predict which days might be "connect the dots" days, which ones we might want to "cross when we can," and which days are "formula" race days.
