Making Your Bet: The Game Of Odds

Oftentimes at the end of a big day of racing, I hear the top teams come off the water and talk about what was working. "We just stayed lifted and it worked well," one team might say, while another might explain that, "We kept our heads out of the boat and sailed to pressure," and another might think that, "The bottom left was strong, but you had to get to the top right." Even with dramatically different ideas of what was working on the race course, those three teams might be top three on the day. One of the most interesting things about our sport is that sometimes you can do everything right and lose, while other times, you can get it all wrong and still win.

The margins on each decision are often very, very small. Maybe the right pays on a beat and six out of the top ten come from that side, but four teams on the left side keep their air clear, stay fast and stay lifted for most of the beat to round out the top ten. Maybe one team focuses most of their energy on using a compass to stay lifted every beat, and another team doesn't even have a compass, instead relying 100% on fleet management. One of the top international 470 teams with several Olympic appearances and multiple 470 World Championship medals to their names, who I trained with during the summer of 2009 used to say, "We always play the wind as if it was oscillating. We focus our energy on timing the shifts and staying lifted. Even if that's not exactly what is happening, or the shift persists, it works out enough of the time that we are always in the battle."

What all of this means is that we are constantly making little bets about what will work, and even the best sailors in the world are wrong a very significant percentage of the time. The five types of day outlined here are designed to offer specific strategies tailored for the conditions on each day. The percentage chance that they work out for any given race is high, but certainly not assured, and the better you can get at incorporating other information into your decision making model, the better you'll get at using these types of day effectively.

In the next few sections we're going to dig into some of the tools that we can use to help us decide on which strategy to play. This is something that you'll need to do every race, and the more you practice, the better you'll get at it.

Over the summer of 2022 I coached with Evan Aras, who made the analogy that every race is a story: you make your decisions based on the events that have transpired so far in the story, and those decisions should line up in a consistent way. When you are making good decisions, they align with your beliefs about what the wind is doing, what the current is doing and how to manage the fleet. When you make bad decisions, it's generally because you've lost the plot a little bit, and you start making decisions that do not align with the rest of the storyline.

I used to talk about this same idea as your "mental model" for the race course. Your mental model of the race course is the full set of facts that you're using to make decisions. The more you sail on the course, the more you prove or disprove your model, and adjust it to fit the observations that you're making. Here's an example from an event that I coached in 2022:

We're going to talk about how to create these mental models, or storylines and how to use them along with the type of day, to end up with a plan for your race.

Many coaches and sailors call this part, making a "game plan," but I prefer to think of it as "placing a bet". To me, the term "game plan" is too black and white: "X is what is happening, therefore Y is what I'm going to do." The game plan is either right or wrong, and if you get off script, there's no coming back. In contrast, placing a bet is a little bit more about playing the odds. Maybe we'll be a little bit correct; maybe we'll really nail it; maybe we'll be a little bit wrong; or maybe we'll totally blow it. Either way, each bet is an important data point that helps to inform our next bet. On any day, there is a lot of uncertainty and the ability to adapt your strategy to roll with the punches comes from this idea of playing the odds.

Let's look at one, super simple example of race course betting odds to start thinking about what this tool looks like. In the last section we talked about Race Course Philosphy, and the fact that Plan A boats off the starting line tend to go straight more often than plan B and Plan C starters. This means that a disproportionate number of teams who have good starts end up on the left side of the course. With all else being equal, you might expect a small bias towards the top 10 rounders coming from the left, so your base case betting odds for which side might come out ahead could be 55/45 favoring the left. If however, you see the right looking strong after the first beat, this might be a stronger indicator of a right favored race course than if the top pack comes from the left, so we might adjust our bettering odds to 45/55 favoring the right.

One analogy that I think is really important to understand is card counting in blackjack. The whole idea of blackjack is that you play the odds - you win some, you lose some, but the question is when to bet big. People who count cards win by betting small amounts on the first several hands, so they might win some and lose some, but they're never winning or losing very much. What they ARE doing though, is collecting data to help them understand the odds, so that as more cards become visible, they have a better idea of when to bet big. In sailing, you should always be filing away data points in your mind. Ultimately the goal is to build a mental model of the race course that you can use to decide when to bet big. On some types of day, you'll never have high enough confidence in the odds to want to bet big, and that's okay! But the more you think about this, the better you'll get at assessing your confidence in the type of day, and the next feature of the course, and the better your decision making will get.

One of the biggest things that I've found is that if you do your homework, you settle on a strategy and you make a bet prior to the starting sequence, it rarely pays to change your mind halfway through the sequence. All of those data points that you'll collect before racing that we're about to talk about - forecast data or compass numbers or split tacks - are like counting cards. Each one is a data point, and each one helps to refine your model for what is going on in the day. If you have an hour before your first race to do your homework, the chances that a last minute shift or puff should cause you to throw out all of that research is really low. My rule of thumb is that you should stick with your plan unless there is a change in the big picture weather in the area - so if it was foggy for instance, and the fog starts pushing out, you might change your bet. Otherwise, stick to your guns and trust the work that you did before the start.

The beauty of thinking about your plan as betting odds is that you can account for new factors without throwing out the whole plan. Let's say you think that the right is going to be strong because you see more consistent pressure there, so you decide on the outside right strategy. But as you get into sequence, the wind shifts a bit left, favoring the pin. Do you change your game plan to start at the pin, and try to tack and cross immediately? With the odds based approach, I would probably just shift my starting position slightly towards the pin, choosing to err a bit more towards the favored end of the line, but sticking to the same plan. It allows me to keep my confidence high, while adjusting slightly for those new factors that will undoubtedly appear around the race course.

In the next sevreral sections we'll look at specific data points that you should be collecting before every race to help you place your bet.
