Type 5: Uncertain

Finally, if we're really unsure of the conditions, we need a default strategy that will keep us in the hunt. If you're not sure what is going to matter, then the best strategy is to go back to basics and focus on a few simple things that we picked apart in the Race Course Philosophy section.

Knowing when to use this strategy is really important. So far, most of the strategies we've talked about take place in dynamic conditions with significant pressure differences or shifty wind. In contrast, this final strategy works best in conditions where big picture weather aspects create uncertainty in what will happen next. Two breezes fighting is the perfect example - you may be sailing in a relatively stable breeze, but if another wind is nearby, and it pushes in, it might really mix up the racing. Other times, maybe this is a scenario where you know that a sea breeze will fill in, but you don't know when. On the flip side, this often happens when a thermal circulation falls apart at the end of the day as the land starts to cool. Or maybe it's a wind with very slow, long, random shifts, with one feature per beat where you're not sure which direction the shift will go. Finally, we sometimes see this strategy work well when a factor like sun angle, water color, or nearby shoreline makes it hard to see wind on the water. These are situations where its hard to predict what will happen next, so we just need to make high percentage decisions, let our strengths work for us, and trust that with enough races, the percentages will work out. If you've done your homework well, and you're still having a hard time placing a high percentage bet, the minimize decisions strategy goes back to basics with planned decision points to keep you focused on the right things.

Starting

On the starting line, the general rule of thumb here should be that you are shooting to execute a high percentage escape. Prioritizing low density, and an easy bailout is a good idea if you have the option. In my remote starting module I lay out a flowchart for deciding where to start on the starting line, and I really encourage you to go review that, but for the sake of the Minimize Decisions strategy, here's a simplified version.

If the line is biased by five degrees or less, starting near the leeward side of the boat third of the line puts you in a strong position to play from the middle of the fleet, while keeping options open to both the left and right sides. In addition, it gives you high percentage escape routes if you come off the line in plan B or plan C lanes.

If the line is 5-10 degrees biased towards the pin, you'll probably want to shift to the windward portion of the pin third to lock in the early advantage, though low density will be more important than bias, so if that means starting in the middle third, do it.

Finally, if either end is more than 10 degrees favored, you'll need to go fight it out at that end. Again, go review the starting strategies presented in the stating module, because they go into a lot more depth on how to evaluate risk and consequence on the starting line, and how to build this into your strategy.

First Tack

On the first beat, the metric that we discussed in the Race Course Philosophy section that is most strongly correlated with good outcomes, is whether you are able to sail at full speed for three out of the first five minutes. If you're playing the Minimize Decisions strategy, focus on executing your escape from the line to prioritize having a nice lane where you can let your speed work for you. Again, there's more discussion about this in the Race Course Philosophy topic, and even more in the Google Classroom starting module, but Plan A boats should generally be looking to go fast for two to three minutes and tack in a big lane. Plan B starters should be looking to hang for a minute or a minute and a half, and then find a fat lane to escape into. Plan C boats are looking to escape as early as possible without getting tacked on. If you can upgrade your lane once within the first thirty seconds of the race, and again in the next minute and a half, you'll likely be able to sail full speed for three out of those first five minutes.

Once you have made your escape, your first decision point will be around 70% of the way to layline whether that's on the left side of the course in the plan A scenario or on the right side if you find yourself flushed off the line. The question at that point will be, "Which side has paid so far, and why?" The more you practice this strategy, the better you'll get at answering that question. Generally there are four possible answers - either the right or left paid, and they generally either paid primarily because of pressure or shift. If you think the left paid because of pressure, you'll want to keep extending that direction. If you think it paid because of shift, you'll have to decide whether you think it might persist, or rebound in the other direction. You'll apply the same logic to the right side of the course if you ended up in executing your plan B strategy.

If you decide to tack, ensure that you're exiting into a fat lane that will allow you to keep sailing fast. If you're still not sure what is paying, this might be a good time to cross boats on your hip as long as you don't have to duck anyone to make it happen, that way you can center up for the approach to the weather mark.

Plan B

Because you were unsure what to do in the first place, plan B in the Minimize Decisions Strategy is to take a clearing tack in a fat lane, and let it rip for 3 minutes, essentially executing the same strategy as before, but on the right side of the track rather than the left.

Approaching the Weather Mark

Your second and final decision in the minimize decisions strategy will happen in the last 10% of the beat, so you'll want to center up on the course at 90% to layline, no matter what you see around you. By centering up with 10% of the course left to go, you'll put yourself in a position to ask two important questions while you still have options left. The first question is, "How crowded will the starboard tack layline be?" If the layline is stacking up to be super crowded, you may need to get to lay early, to ensure that you have a spot to get around the mark. This often happens in stable conditions, where the wind speed is moderate, so everyone is going fast, and you haven't seen much movement in the breeze. If there's a chance that there will be gaps in the fleet at the weather mark however, you'll likely want to stay off of layline as long as possible to keep your air clear and avoid over standing. Finally, if you find yourself ahead in the fleet, or you think that the layline will be pretty low density, you'll need to answer the second question, which is, "Where will the final gain be made?"

If you're able to follow this strategy, it will keep you going fast, keep maneuvers to a minimum, minimize risk on the laylines, and allow you to execute a game plan with confidence, knowing that nobody really knows what will happen next.

Downwind

When minimizing decisions downwind, start on the gybe that takes you closest to the leeward mark if possible. Rely on the "9 Ways to Pass Boats Downwind" from the Race Course Philosophy section, and boat on boat tactics to pick off one or two boats if possible. The early gybe back towards the gate ("the decision diamond") keeps your options open in these conditions, ensures that you don't over stand the leeward mark, and gives you one last play coming into the leeward gate.

One of the most important aspects of the Minimize Decisions strategy is that it works out to be a high percentage strategy by hedging against any major mistakes using race course philosophy. This should be a fairly infrequent strategy because the better you get, the more you'll have a prediction about what might happen next, and the more little geographic features will influence your decision making. You can still apply aspects of meteorology and wind prediction to help hedge your bet a little bit in this strategy, so in the next section on tactics we'll start digging into some of the other tools that you have to help bring it all together.
