5 Types of Day

Ask ten Olympic caliber coaches or athletes what strategy will win on a given day, and you're likely to get ten different answers. While all ten of them may have a similar vision in their minds of what a good race looks like in a certain set of conditions, the way that they describe these strategies varies a lot.

Make no mistake, I'm not saying that these people aren't good - in fact, these are the best in the biz. But in a sport where there is so much ambiguity in language - so much subtlety and nuance to strategic decision making and tactical ideas - even the top sailors and coaches often speak in generalities, trying to convey an attitude or a mindset through a series of observations or through a stream of consciousness.

So how do we improve communication about strategy to create more consistent decisions? How do we convey specific, repeatable lessons that our athletes will be able to extrapolate to future situations? How do we clarify and categorize strategy in a more productive, objective system in our own minds?

I believe we can understand strategy in a far more objective, factual way, thus removing a lot of the uncertainty, and introducing confidence into the process, which becomes the most important strategic weapon of all.

Foundations Of The System

When I began this process of developing a more precise system for communication strategic decision making, I started by listening to everyone who would talk to me about strategy to find out what advice was floating around, what categories it could fit into, and how we could do a better job of syncing up strategic ideas across days, venues, teams, age levels, regions of the country, etc. While everyone seemed to have some specific ideas about different sailing styles that were required to race, and everyone had some key nuggets of advice for different conditions that seemed to fall into a few categories, nobody was really able to present a cohesive system for thinking about types of day.

I started organizing the information that I was hearing from other coaches and thinking about the logical underpinnings behind it. Why were some days best played one way, while other days required a whole different set of priorities? And could we use this information to predict the racing style before the start of the first race?

As I sorted the responses from coaches, I found that almost all of the feedback that I was getting fell into one of five categories, and I started to piece together connections between these categories that pointed to underlying conditions based on two aspects of wind stability: stability in angle (shiftiness) and stability in pressure (puffiness). Within each of these categories there were further distinctions: were the puffs "units" or "bands"? Were the shifts predictable or random?

Our discussion of strategy is going to start out by focusing on these 5 types of day - how to identify them, how to set the proper priorities and mind set for each - and then we'll go into some additional strategic skills that will help you implement these ideas in real racing situations.

The top sailors and coaches that I spoke to about types of day were generally concerned with predicting how the fleet would behave, and what the priorities would look like on the race course. The question that they all started with could be boiled down to: "What matters today?"

And within that question, there were several smaller questions that could help figure out more details of the day:

- Does shift matter?

- Does pressure matter?

- Do both matter?

- Is there a place to race to?

- How confident are you?

By looking at the forecast and the course location you should be able to take a pretty good stab at answering all five of these questions, and when you do, you'll start to zero in on the type of day.

The Five Types

The questions that we use to help determine the type of day are critical because they allow us to have a flexible enough system that it can encompass an endless number of scenarios that we might encounter on the water, while being specific enough to answer objectively. The underlying assumption is that on any race course, the priorities that we focus on when creating a game plan for a race is either dictated by wind shifts, by pressure differences, by both, or else we just aren't sure. Occationally venue specific features such as sea state differences or current differences can create an advantage, but for the most part, there are no other logical, strategic possibilities.

The following scenarios illustrate the five types of days that we're going to discuss in this section.

On a day with consistent wind speed where shift matters a lot, we'll talk about the Inside Track and how to stay in phase to win the day. On light air days where pressure comes down the course in patches, we'll discuss Connecting The Dots. One of the most commonly misunderstood types of day is the Edge Out day, where both pressure and shift matter. This might be a day where your coach is telling you to "win your side". Sometimes we'll have days where pressure matters because there is a place to race to - one side of the course with more wind - or sometimes there is a place to race to because of sea state, whether that's favorable current or flat water. On these days we'll implement an Outside Track strategy. And finally, there will be days where confidence is low, and we need to Minimize Decisions, so this last strategy will be optimized for decision making in low certainty situations.

We'll talk about the ideal way to play each of these strategies, as well as the plan B execution in each case. We'll talk about how to identify when the type of day is actually changing - for instance when it is changing from an inside track, to an outside track day.

By understanding the five types of day and how to identify them, you'll have a very effective toolbox for setting the correct mindset and making a game plan, so let's dive in, and start talking about the connect the dots strategy.
