Type 2: Inside Track

In steady oscillating conditions, with mostly uniform pressure, when you ask the question, "What matters today?" hopefully the answer will be, "Wind shifts." In typical sea breeze conditions with a stable oscillation, everyone has the same pressure, so the main strategic focus that the top teams prioritize is sailing less distance by staying lifted. You'll hear some coaches call this condition, "Cross when you can," because a good indicator that you're headed is that you have the angle to cross the boats on your hip. In a good fleet though, you'll notice that there is rarely any crossing because as soon as you tack to cross the boats on your hip, they'll lead back, and when they get the next header and tack on it, you'll likely want to lead them. In this way, you can almost crowdsource your decision making by ensuring that you never cross any packs, and never get crossed by any packs. The mantra here should be, "Do the average thing, and let other people take themselves out."

While some coaches call this an "open race course" because you're not pushing hard to get to one side or the other, generally it is a higher percentage move to try to play towards one side of the course based on other observations like geographic effects, weather trends, cloud patterns, or sea state. Keep in mind though that you'll likely be mostly focused on fleet management with only a small portion of attention required to keep track of factors outside of positioning and angle.

Compass numbers are critical on this type of day, so get out early and do your homework to try to create a little edge on the rest of the fleet.

Starting

If you know your compass numbers, the first big opportunity to execute this strategy better than others is to practice starting in a spot where you can get on the lifted tack with a big lane early. Starting closer to the boat end often makes this easier because you'll have options off the line. If the race committee is sharp, they'll likely be trying to set the line square to the average wind direction, so the favored end won't matter as much as just being able to get lifted right away. This also means that you should consider starting on port tack at the boat end if it puts you on the lift at the starting gun. This is probably not a condition to fight hard for a 5 degree line bias.

First Tack

Off the line, your first tack will be all about tacking to stay lifted. You should be tracking the wind angle through the whole sequence if possible, to know if the wind is shifting, so that off the line you're verifying with the compass and then either holding in the lift, or tacking as soon as possible to get lifted. The biggest mistake that most teams make in this condition is sailing out of phase for the first few minutes because they don't know what a lift looks like or what a header looks like. Work hard between races in this condition to know the compass numbers and you will be rewarded with confidence off the line!

The Last Shift

The other big opportunity on the inside track is getting the final shift right. Again, this is an area where many people just go with the flow rather than fighting for the favored side, and if you can learn to identify the final shift, you'll be able to make gains at the very end of the beat. To find the favored side at the end of the beat you need to know two things. First you need to understand that the final shift is like a persistent shift. As the wind oscillates back and forth, you would generally shoot to stay lifted by tacking on the mean compass heading as the breeze swings. For the final shift however, digging hard into that last shift is critical. This means though that you need to know which shift is going to be the last one, so the second thing you'll need to know is how long the shifts are generally lasting and how long ago the last shift happened. If you've been seeing a shift every three minutes, and it has been two minutes since the last shift, you'll likely be looking for one more shift if the mark is more than a minute away. On the other hand, if the mark is two minutes away when you feel an oscillation happen, you know that this is likely to be the last shift. One thing that will help build your confidence in these conditions is understanding how consistently the oscillations are timed, so do your homework before the racing starts, and write down your compass number every minute.

A good conversation to have before each race in this condition is to articulate how many tacks you think the leaders will do, and how many tacks the mid-fleet pack will do. On a long course, or a day with frequent shifts, this number will be higher. On days with more stable breeze, or shorter courses, this number will be smaller. The closer to the front of the pack, the more patient you can be in waiting for the ideal numbers, while the farther back you are, the more you'll be willing to take smaller shifts.

One trick that I use in venues where I expect to see a sea breeze over several days, is to record GPS tracks each day to review each evening to help figure out the timing of the shifts. Often times big picture shift tracking isn't something that you have a lot of time to do on the water, but if you record a GPS track, you'll be able to review it later on.

If you are coaching and have wind instrumentation, sea breeze days are good days to be sharp on the instruments to try to time the shifts. Keep in mind that if you are motoring or sailing upwind, the shifts will come to you faster than if you are moving downwind.

Plan B

The plan B for inside tracks depends on the size and length of the shifts - the fewer shifts you'll experience, and the smaller in magnitude, the more important it is to just get to a nice open piece of water to go fast. With more shifts, or bigger magnitude though, you'll need to stay lifted even if it means taking a slightly more compromised lane. One important exercise when executing plan B on the inside track is to think about what lane you deserve - if you came off the line in front, don't settle for a second tier lane, but at the same time, if you're 12th in the race, you need to take the 12th best lane - too good and one of the top 11 teams will likely tack on you; too bad and you'll bleed boat lengths by sailing in bad air. Boats sailing the plan B strategy on the inside track make gains by staying lifted in lanes that aren't worse than the other boats that they're racing against (if you're 10th for instance, find a lane that keeps you lifted, and isn't worse than the 9th place team or the 11th place team). Stay in phase with the fleet, and let other teams take themselves out. Find the "sneaky lanes" that allow you to stay alive and lifted while others drop back. As with the plan A strategy, the mantra here should be, "Do the average thing, and let other people take themselves out."

The Lane You Deserve

The idea of "The Lane You Deserve" is critical to understand on inside track days, so I'm going to include an excerpt from The McBride Racing Tactical Playbook here, to dig into the concept a little bit more.

Downwind

In inside track conditions, the first decision you'll need to make downwind is which gybe is headed. On the first lap of a track, you may need to postpone a gybe onto the headed board to avoid bad air from the upwind starboard tack lay line, but you'll want to get onto the headed gybe as quickly as possible. From here, generally the tactical game is all about trying to jump the boat in front of you. The early gybe back towards the gate ("the decision point diamond") keeps your options open in these conditions, ensures that you don't over stand the leeward mark, and gives you one last play coming into the leeward gate. Remember, downwind you'll be moving with the wind, so if you saw two oscillations on your upwind, chances are good that you'll only see one on the downwind.

Second Beat

As a coach at the Olympic level, I work with some of the best sailors in the country. I always have my own opinions about how they should race on a certain day, but when coaching top athletes, I try to avoid the narrative of, "I thought X, but you did Y, so you must be wrong." Instead, I find that a more productive way to evaluate teams' strategies is to ask the question, "Did every decision make sense based on a consistent narrative?" The gate rounding of the inside track strategy is one of the most common places that I see this narrative break down, even for experienced teams and if you can build the correct habits here, you'll pick up a lot of boat lengths at the bottom of the course on an oscillating day.

On a good race course with square geometry, race committees generally try to set gate marks square to the average wind direction. In an oscillating breeze, this means that rounding the favored gate will also put you on the headed tack. As such, on oscillating days the expectation should be that more often than not, if you are able to round the favored gate, the maneuver will be a "round-and-tack" to get on the lift right away.

Because of these same fundamentals, if you find yourself farther back in the fleet on an oscillating day, the gate becomes one of the best passing lanes on the race course. Option A as you come into the gate should be the same as the leaders: in low traffic situations, you'll round the favored gate and try to tack immediately. If you can execute a good round-and-tack maneuver, you'll often be able to sneak inside of teams who rounded, sailed for a minute, and then tacked, which will set you up to gain on the next shift. Interestingly, option B can also be a good opportunity to gain if you recognize that there is traffic at the favored gate. In option B, the move is to round the unfavored gate in less traffic, and hang straight to stay on the lifted tack. By executing a slightly simpler maneuver, you'll have a quicker escape from the mark, and you'll gain some leverage into the next shift, which should be a gain as you continue up the race course.

In reality, this leeward gate will almost always be dictated largely by traffic, so the main priority to keep in mind on the second beat, is to get lifted as quickly as possible in the lane that you deserve!
