Tactics of The Inside Track

One mantra that I like to keep in mind when executing the inside track strategy is, "Lead back lead packs."

In the section on Edge Out Tactics we'll talk about when to take fat lanes, and when to take thin lanes, but in contrast, the inside track usually benefits from taking "average" lanes - not so big that it tempts your competitors to take it, but not so small that you're forced to tack early, or forced to take losses by sailing in worse air than your closest competitors.

When we're sailing the inside track strategy, there are a few rules of thumb that can help with lane selection and shift recognition that I'll illustrate in a series of examples below. Each example is from the McBride Racing Tactical Playbook, and presents a hypothetical scenario, followed by a rule of thumb and description of the discussion and decision making process surrounding the scenario.

Take a look, decide how you would respond to these setups, and then read about the approach that we would recommend.

UW 5.1 -- Cross When You Can

Guiding Principle(s): Inside track.

The Play: In a steady oscillating breeze, the minimum distance around the course is to tack each time the wind shifts through the average wind direction. However, in practice, it can often be difficult to know where that average direction is, and even if you know what it is, tactically there is often a higher-percentage move: cross when you can. This nugget of wisdom that coaches often preach ticks off a lot of different boxes on the strategic checklist. First of all, crossing packs when you have the opportunity often helps to put you in phase if you are uncertain of the shift pattern. If this is the case, chances are, much of the pack on your hip will end up tacking also. Probably more importantly, crossing when you can, establishes control over the boats around you. Putting you in a strong position to fleet manage the pack that you have just crossed. If the fleet does not tack to match your play, consider hipping back up on the fleet to loose cover and minimize leverage as you sail into the next shift.

In the scenario pictured, Red has gained enough of an advantage (likely from a small right shift) that she can tack without the threat of being lee-bowed by any of the boats on her hip. Using the boats on your hip as an indicator of whether or not a wind shift has occurred is a very good way to stay in phase. On port, the play applies in the same circumstances, however, you would need a bigger shift to tack and cross because you don't have right of way to force your competitors to avoid you.

Most Common Mistakes: Applying this play if it takes you out of pressure or into traffic.

Pro Tip: To defend against this, competitors will often tack simultaneously to prevent you from consolidating gains. Pair this play with UW 4.1 to close leverage and lock in gains when you are in a strong shift.

Best Communication: "We can cross the boats on our hip," "Let's consolidate," "Center up on this pack"
