Downwind racing in this condition can be really dynamic because the speed gain of staying in pressure can offset the losses from many , if that's what it takes to stay in the puffs. Be sure to gybe while you're still in the puff, rather than waiting to feel the pressure decrease. Once again, this means trusting your eyes! If the dots are moving down the course, you may be able to take one or two all the way from top to bottom, so it may seem a bit more like a channel of wind rather than a "dot" as you see on the upwind.

One comment that I often hear on connect the dots days, is that boats chasing a leader sometimes have an easier time making decisions downwind than the leaders. This is because the chasing boat can watch the lead boat, and the moment the lead boat shows signs of sailing into less pressure, the chasing boat prepares to gybe. If you're the leader in this situation, it's important to practice rolling straight into a gybe the moment the boat goes soft. Instead of waiting to see if the pressure comes back, or heading up to re-pressure the foils, try using the softening pressure to create weather heel and using that weather heel to roll into a slow carving gybe*. This will often be your best chance of surviving the jump from the boat behind.

*\Note:** Slowing the turn down when sailing into a lull is very important because your apparent wind will be swinging forwards. If the wind is light enough, a normal rate of turn may collapse your sails, and in most conditions it will take longer for you to rebuild speed on the exit unless you slow enough to allow the apparent wind to swing back aft.

Second Beat

On the second beat, the biggest mistake that I see teams make in this condition is that they get defensive and start trying to fleet manage. Keep in mind that what got you to the front of the fleet in the first place in this condition was keeping your head out of the boat and hunting for more wind. Because the wind is so localized, the moment you start trying to fleet manage in this condition, you're likely to get sucked back into the battle with the boats behind. Instead, be confident in what your eyes are telling you and keep hunting for more wind!

Overall, we don't see this condition super often in skiff racing, because race committees like to try to wait for wind to solidify more, but knowing how to get it done in connect the dots can be worth a lot of points when you do get to put your skills to work, so roll this strategy around in your head, and jump on the opportunity to practice in these conditions.
