Type 1: Connect the Dots

The first type of day that we're going to look at is a "Connect the dots" day, which is likely a term that you've heard before, or maybe even used to describe a day where pressure is the most important feature of the course. The description should conjur a picture of distinct puffs, rolling down the race course, and a type of day where sailors need to have their heads out of the boat, eyes scanning for the next opportunity. Often times, these days are light air days, when the difference between puffs and lulls is a large percentage of the overall wind speed. We'll talk about how to approach this on the starting line, the first beat, the plan B, and elsewhere around the race course, but before we get started, it's important to address one common misconception.

When I talk to coaches and sailors about identifying the type of day, I am constantly surprised at how often days get categorized as Connect The Dots days, and I think that it stems from a misunderstanding of the Edge Out type of day that we will address later. On Connect The Dots days, pressure is the most important feature on the race course, and there are many distinct pressure features on the course. To fall into the connect the dots category, pressure must be overwhelmingly more important than shift. As a result, many connect the dots days are light air days, where the difference between sailing in a puff and a lull might be a 100% change in speed - enough to make any wind shift insignificant in comparison. When this is the case, it is worthwhile to sail through a header if it gets you to more pressure sooner. This should be a distinctly different sailing style than the one adopted on shifty, puffy (often gradient wind driven) days where both pressure and shift play a role in getting up the course.

The mistake that I often observe teams make, is identifying the puffs visually and determining that the day will be a Connect the Dots type of day without assessing the importance of the shift component. If the prssure isn't overwhelmingly more important than the shift, then we're probably not talking about a Connect The Dots day, and if you sail those days the same way, you'll definitely come away frustrated!

A question that you should be asking every day that you go sailing is, "What matters today?" or "What is going to make the difference between winning and losing today?"

If the answer to that question when you look out at the water, or you look at the forecast is, "Pressure is going to matter most today." Then there's a good chance that we're looking at a Connect The Dots type of day. The main feature of connect the dots is that we have really distinct units of pressure that are going to be driving the decision making. If you can stay in the pressure, you'll be faster than anyone else, and that will be the most important factor.

On light, gradient wind days we see this a lot. If the windspeed is 4-6 knots, someone sailing in a puff of 6 might be sailing in 50% more pressure than another boat in a lull. This is going to make it critical to stay in pressure while wind shifts are probably secondary at best. Compare this to a puffy, shifty, 15 knot day, where that same 2 knot puff is only worth 13% more, and you can see why Connect The Dots conditions are usually light air days. Patchy texture on the water can be a good indicator of connect the dots conditions, as well as distinct puffs that fan out.

One of the most common mistakes when identifying Connect The Dots days, is that pressure is often associated with with shifts, and if those shifts are big enough to matter, you'll need to play the Edge Out strategy instead of Connect The Dots.

So once we have identified a connect the dots day, how do we use that knowledge to craft a high percentage strategy?

To start with, connecting the dots is much more about seeing the wind and fighting to stay in the pressure than it is about managing the fleet. Some top coaches that I talked to about this condition used the terms, "Head on a swivel," or, "Do what you see," as mantras for the day because the visual aspect of wind prediction is so critical on these patchy days. With that said, positioning matters relative to other boats because the wind is so localized, that you'll need the freedom to tack, so getting locked into packs is really bad. Keeping your head out of the boat is key to sailing well in this condition, because the "dots" are visible, making this a very visual style of racing.

One key to understanding Connect The Dots is realizing that wind is three dimensional, and the texture that you're seeing on the water is probably skipping or bouncing or falling from higher levels in the atmosphere where there is more wind. Generally, pressure is just as likely to fill in anywhere on the course, so "dots" are just as likely to fill on the edges as in the middle. This tends to mean that there is very little repeatablity from race to race, or even leg to leg. Instead, the teams who move forward in the fleet in these conditions do so by hunting for the next pressure, keeping their options open and their eyes up the beat. There is a tremendous amount of opportunity to move forward in these conditions, so stay alert and keep betting!

While repeatability from race to race is low, there are a few tricks that top tacticians use to find small advanatages on the margins. We've discussed why pressure is the dominant feature in these conditions, and this generally means that if you play the pressure well anywhere on the course, you'll have a good shot at rounding the top mark in a strong position. As a secondary consideration however, this pressure is often associated with shift, either because the pressure is fanning out on the water (sometimes described as a "cat's paw" puff), because the wind from higher atmospheric levels is coming from a slightly different direction, or just for the reason that the boat can point higher in pressure (velocity lift - not a real wind shift). This means that it can often be helpful on connect the dots days to use a tool like windy.com to check the wind shear or to look at what direction the clouds are moving higher in the sky to understand if there might be a bias to the puff shift direction. If the higher level wind is left shifted, we might see more of the puffs resulting in left angle, which could make it advantageous to connect the dots on the left side of the course, in contrast to a scenario where the wind aloft is right shifted, and thus the righty puffs make the right side slightly advantageous. In either of these scenarios, it's still likely that playing the pressure anywhere on the course will still be the most important factor, but within the top group, the advantage may go to the team who identifies this underlying shift bias.

When in doubt, keep your head out of the boat, trust your eyes, stay lifted, and stay off of lay lines to keep your options open.

Starting

On the starting line, committing to your position late in the sequence can give you an opportunity to start in more pressure, so spend a lot of time in the sequence hanging out on port tack to get an idea of what's coming down the course. Once you have an idea of where you need to start to get to the first puff, sail on port against the grain to go find your hole. Starting in low density in a spot on the line is probably more important in these conditions than in any other conditions, because it will allow you to make your own decisions up the course. On these days, a port tack start can be a great way to pop out into a position where you have freedom to tack early on. Often times if you can create a small advantage at the start, it gets easier to go where you see the most pressure, so the rich often get richer. If you get pinned by a group, you'll have a harder time controlling your destiny for the rest of the race.

First Tack

Your first tack off the line will be all about sailing to pressure. Have your head out of the boat, and believe what your eyes tell you. The key to executing here is keeping your options open, so low density positioning with the option to tack is important.

Plan B

If you find yourself battling back from a bad start, remember that there is a lot of opportunity on Connect The Dots days, because pressure and shifts are so localized. If you can get free to a place where you can make your own decisions, and work the pressure that you have, you'll move forwards in the fleet. A mantra to live by in this condition is, "Do the best you can with the pressure you have." Especially if you had a bad start, you might not be in a position to get to the very best pressure on the course, but the most important thing you can do is focus on your little local area and making the most of what you have rather than getting greedy and trying to get across the course to something better. Connect the dots wind is often fickle, and by the time you cross the course, the whole landscape will probably look different.

Downwind

Downwind racing in this condition can be really dynamic because the speed gain of staying in pressure can offset the losses from many , if that's what it takes to stay in the puffs. Be sure to gybe while you're still in the puff, rather than waiting to feel the pressure decrease. Once again, this means trusting your eyes! If the dots are moving down the course, you may be able to take one or two all the way from top to bottom, so it may seem a bit more like a channel of wind rather than a "dot" as you see on the upwind.

One comment that I often hear on connect the dots days, is that boats chasing a leader sometimes have an easier time making decisions downwind than the leaders. This is because the chasing boat can watch the lead boat, and the moment the lead boat shows signs of sailing into less pressure, the chasing boat prepares to gybe. If you're the leader in this situation, it's important to practice rolling straight into a gybe the moment the boat goes soft. Instead of waiting to see if the pressure comes back, or heading up to re-pressure the foils, try using the softening pressure to create weather heel and using that weather heel to roll into a slow carving gybe*. This will often be your best chance of surviving the jump from the boat behind.

*\Note:** Slowing the turn down when sailing into a lull is very important because your apparent wind will be swinging forwards. If the wind is light enough, a normal rate of turn may collapse your sails, and in most conditions it will take longer for you to rebuild speed on the exit unless you slow enough to allow the apparent wind to swing back aft.

Second Beat

On the second beat, the biggest mistake that I see teams make in this condition is that they get defensive and start trying to fleet manage. Keep in mind that what got you to the front of the fleet in the first place in this condition was keeping your head out of the boat and hunting for more wind. Because the wind is so localized, the moment you start trying to fleet manage in this condition, you're likely to get sucked back into the battle with the boats behind. Instead, be confident in what your eyes are telling you and keep hunting for more wind!

Overall, we don't see this condition super often in skiff racing, because race committees like to try to wait for wind to solidify more, but knowing how to get it done in connect the dots can be worth a lot of points when you do get to put your skills to work, so roll this strategy around in your head, and jump on the opportunity to practice in these conditions.
