Tactics of Connect The Dots

On connect the dots days, the number one mantra is, "Sail your own race." Pressure is localized, so what you feel and the opportunities that you have access to are different from any other boat on the course. You might see big pressure on one side of the course, but if you can't get there, it doesn't matter - you have to do what you can with what you have.

How does this impact our tactical positioning around other boats? The main answer is that we need to maintain our ability to make our own decisions while closing down options for others. Getting pinned from tacking can be disastrous, because if the boat preventing you from tacking is in better pressure than you, there will be nothing you can do to upgrade your position.

Starting on port can be a big weapon here because it immediately gets you out of sync with the rest of the fleet, and makes it harder for other boats to control you. Low density starts and boat end starts are good for similar reasons - freedom to tack is everything.

On one connect the dots day of racing, while debriefing with the 49er fleet at the Oakcliff Sailing Center in Oyster Bay, one of the sailors remarked, "We always wanted to round the top mark just behind the leaders. We would follow them until they started to run out of pressure, at which point they had to point higher, and we would roll into a gybe, immediately forcing them to extend straight into the lull for a few seconds, while we stayed in the puff."

If you're the boat ahead in this case, it's worth learning from the boat behind! They're looking for signs of lighter pressure to inform their gybe, so if you feel the pressure lightening, and put the bow up in response, you're telegraphing the change, and giving them time to set up for an easy jump. On the other hand, if you have the discussion ahead of time, that at the first sign of lighter pressure the skipper is going to turn the boat to gybe, both team members can be poised so that when pressure fades, rather than going bow up to build pressure, you let the pressure fade, the boat heel to weather and use this weather heel to roll straight into a gybe.

In response, maybe the boat behind changes their plan to a simultaneous gybe rather than gybing when you go bow up, but now you can defend by gybing to a hot angle - on my teams we use the term, “Gybe to hot.”

This game of cat and mouse is how the tactical game works, so learning to read the mind of your competition to understand where they think the opportunities lie is very important!
