Tactics of The Edge Out Strategy

When it comes to learning how to execute the Edge Out strategy well, one of the most challenging aspects of these types of day is that often the rich get richer. If you can escape from the line and make the first decision correctly, you set yourself up to control the fleet, making the next move easier, and the move after that even easier. Get it wrong however, and it will be an especially difficult fight to get back into the race. As a result we're going to start with a discussion about the first tactical decision off the line - the timing of the first tack relative to other boats - and then we'll build from there.

The following illustration shows the importance of this first tack timing. In these three images, Red, Purple, and Green have started to leeward of Blue, and have created a half boat length advantage one minute after the start. All three are looking to tack.

Red is not sure where she wants to go, but after seeing Blue decide to tack, matches the maneuver a second later.

Purple knows she wants to tack, and communicates that she wants a "simultaneous tack" with Blue, turning at the same time and maintaining the original distance.

Green knows that she is looking to tack and pressure Blue, so the moment she sees Blue prepping sheets for the tack, she starts cheating into the turn to be one step ahead.

The end result is that Green can put the bow down to pressure Blue, but may need to tack away fairly quickly if Blue gains an advantage. Red has a big lane to live in, which may be good if she expects to go straight for a long time, but doesn't put much pressure on Blue, and is at a disadvantage if she expects a right shift next, because she has given Blue additional leverage. Purple maintains the same leverage, which gives her tactical options in the next shift.

While the Red position is likely good for a Place To Race To/Outside Track race, or a Minimize Decisions strategy because it will allow Red to hang for a long time, Purple is likely better for the Inside Track strategy because she will be able to live through some small shifts, while having the option of a tight leebow on the next shift. Green is ideal for an Edge Out strategy where Green started close to the pin. In this case, pressuring Blue back to the middle of the course takes away their ability to sail a high mode tactically or for VMG reasons, and forces them to sail quickly back towards the rest of the fleet.

Let's look at an example from a small, regional 49er race in 2022.

On this track, the boat that we're looking at - let's call him George - won the pin end, and quickly gained an advantage on 3 boats on his hip.

The weather boat of the three - let's call him Larry - had a plan A start and hug on George's hip, while the other two were forced to bail out. After about a minute of sailing on starboard tack, Larry faded slightly into George, and tacked to clear. Seeing Larry tack out, George looked around, realized that he too wanted to tack to cover the fleet, and tacked about 10 seconds later.

As we can see from the speed graph, George was going 10 knots upwind just before his first tack, which means that by waiting 10 seconds to match Larry, George gave him about 40 additional meters of leverage. In a 5 degree right shift, this is an extra 3.5 meter gain for Larry, or 7 meters in a 10 degree shift. Assuming he is likely going to wait for a favorable shift to bring back, this probably negates George's lead on the next 10 degree shift.

In this case, George should have had the discussion much earlier about whether he wanted to tack, so that when Larry tacked, the decision was already made. From there, the question is one of how strong George is. If George has a full boat length advantage or more, he may want to try for the tight cover from the Green example above. If he is moderately strong, but worried that a wind shift might be enough for Larry to get to his breeze in the tight lane, maybe he would take the purple lane. If he feels that he has made all of his gains due to a speed advantage despite being in right phase, or if he feels that there is more left shift left to come, maybe the red positioning makes more sense to take additional leverage to the left, but in this case confidence would need to be quite high, and one of the characteristics that we have discussed about edge out conditions is the inherent randomness and instability in the wind, so this is probably not a bet that aligns with your underlying thesis.

Edge Out Tactics From Front v. Middle; Early v. Late

One characteristic of edge out tactics is that they change slightly as the fleet thins out throughout the race. Let's dig into the differences.

In the illustration above, let's say you're the weather boat racing against Blue, and you've built a 1 boat length advantage. You're edging out left, and when the left shift happens, Blue suddenly starts feeling stronger - let's say they pull bow even - and tack back at you. You could call starboard, but if they decide to leebow, they'll be in a strong position to pinch you off, and you'll be forcing a split, which is not really what we want with our close competitors. Instead, the move here is to decide what you think the best weapon to attack might be.

In this illustration, Yellow tacks at the same time as Blue to maintain leverage and keep enough of a gap that she can tack back without getting pinned. This is a nice option because it maximizes your time sailing the lifted tack (you tack on the shift instead of before or after it), and because it keeps you bow forward enough that you don't worry about blue being a threat if the wind shifts more left.

In contrast, Green goes for a tighter leebow on Blue, which is a bit more of a match racing move. This is more aggressive, and gives Green the opportunity to start hurting Blue in just a tiny right shift. If you have separated from the fleet more - often later on in the race (second beat?) - and you're not worried about losing the boats behind you, this is a nice move because it can basically only go 1 way: you either hurt Blue, or you hold even. In contrast, giving Blue more leverage can allow them to escape into different pressure or a bit more lefty, which might give them the ability to turn the tables on you and put you in this same tight leebow position when you have to tack back.

Finally, Red sees the shift coming, and tacks quickly onto the shift. The communication in the boat before the tack was, "As soon as I feel any left shift, I'm turning the boat." Instead of putting the bow down in the lefty and then tacking, Red then is prepared to roll straight into the tack and opens up a bit more leverage. This is generally a nice move early in the beat, when the rest of the fleet on your hip is still an issue because you are able to bring strength back at them, while building slightly more leverage to gain on Blue when the next right shift comes. By doing this early in the beat, you ensure that there is plenty of run-way left for the right shift to come in (as opposed to late in the beat, where you might never get the righty to bring back at Blue).

To be clear, there is not an initial VMG difference with any of these scenarios, but the tactical positioning changes the pressure on the boats around you in subtle but critical ways.

Leverage And Risk

One of the ideas here that can be applied across any type of day is that risk is a function of leverage, and that you want to adjust your strategy depending on where you are in the fleet. When you are winning the race, you can still play the edge out left strategy, but your willingness to give leverage to the boats you're racing should be lower. In contrast, when you're 3rd, or 5th or 10th playing the edge out strategy, you may be looking for a bit more leverage on the boats nearby, because you might be looking for the next shift to get you a bit more of an advantage.

Notice that in any case, I'm talking about pretty subtle differences. The difference between Green's position and Red's position, might be a total of 2, 3, or 4 seconds between when they tack, but that time and leverage can make a significant difference in the game of inches.

The better you get at this, the more you will find the position that both (1) keeps you executing your strategy for the type of day, while (2) scaling risk appropriately through leverage depending on where you are in the fleet. If you tack too close on your competitor you will not be able to execute your strategy, but if you give them too much leverage, you won't be able to control them and you give them a chance of getting back into the race with some good luck.

The example below is an excerpt from a debrief that I wrote after a day of practice racing. See if you can pick out some of the scenarios that we've discussed so far:
