Making Your Bet: Master The Compass

Using the compass has aspects of art and science and takes practice that can distract from other important race decisions at first, but this is one of your best tools for determining the type of day and executing your plan. I'm going to walk you through the basics, but I can't stress the point enough, that you should absolutely have a compass on your boat, and you should practice using it until it becomes part of your every day process. If you're a junior sailor, learning how to use the compass now will give you a huge leg up down the road because you'll start to see the art of interpreting the numbers. If you've been sailing for a while and are just now learning how to use the compass or looking to add some tricks, this will be a great way to make your decision making more process oriented and reproducible. Okay, let's dive in.

So the process that I use to start understanding a day of racing is pretty simple. Some people sail upwind and record a compass heading every minute for 30 minutes or something like that, but personally, I like to just keep track of the heading on an ongoing basis without writing anything down. Specifically what I'm looking for is my max lift and max header number on each tack along with the average range. For instance you might sail along for 10 minutes on starboard and see the compass click back and forth between 190 and 195 with periods where it ticks up to 200 for a while. Maybe you see a momentary spike to 205 for a few seconds. We could call that a range from 190-205, but where the art comes in, is recognizing that the momentary spike to 205 might not be a repeatable moment - maybe it was a wave, or maybe just one random puff - so we might actually call that a range from 190-200. This is one reason that you need to practice using the compass.

Once we get those numbers, I would write them down - "190/200" - on the starboard side of my boat. If I'm sailing upwind during the race, and I see 190 on the compass, that lets me know that I'm on a pretty down angle, and I should probably consider tacking. One little convention here that you can use to help stay organized, and help you make faster decisions, is to always record wind angles in 5 degree increments when possible. If I see my compass bouncing around between 203 and 207 for a long period of time, and then shifting back to 191-194, I'll generally write that down as 190-205. This keeps the math simple, and accounts for the fact that some of the compass movement might be due to the boat bouncing around. On the other hand, if I see the compass locked on 207 for a minute or so, I might actually record the 207 number, because I might be looking that more precise number again.

When you're warming up, you want to get numbers for both starboard tack and port tack, though in my experience it's common to dedicate a lot of time to one side and not a lot to the other tack. Again, this is where you'll need to practice and figure out the process that works best for your team. On a J70 team that I raced with, we would spend a lot of time getting our starboard angles, and then often only have five minutes left on port before we needed to head back downwind. If you consider the fact that many wind shifts take ten minutes or sometimes longer, this means that we likely didn't see the whole range on port. In this case, a trick that you can use is that if you know the tacking angle of your boat, and you know that you tacked on a left shift, you can estimate what the port angles might be, or what range you might expect to see. As you go through the day, you'll have more and more opportunity to write these numbers down, and the picture will become clearer.

One of the tricks with the compass is knowing what number to tack on. In certain conditions we see a steady, symmetrical oscillation in the wind - it trends slowly left and then slowly right and then back left, etc. In this circumstance, the goal is to always be lifted, so we need to know the average wind direction. If we're looking at our wind range of 190-200, the average here would be 195. In the other example, where the wind range was 190-205, the average would be 197.5. If we saw a range of 191-207, the average would be 199. This is an example of where recording wind directions in 5 degree increments makes the math a little bit easier. In any of these cases, if we're seeing a steady oscillation, our goal is to tack anytime we find ourselves on the headed side of the average number. That's an important idea, because many people like to wait until they see the max down number to tack, but at that point, you might have already been sailing a header for a while.

So when would you want to wait to see those max down numbers? Well the last example was very idealistic - a slow steady oscillation going one direction and then the next. In a well developed sea breeze we might see this, but in practice it is somewhat rare. Instead, what we often see is more sporadic movement. Maybe the wind has angles that it likes to settle into, so instead of a slow, steady shift, we see 190 hold for a few minutes, and then - bang - it shifts quickly to 205, where it holds for a few minutes before shifting back quickly. Sometimes we see a slow shift one way and a quick shift another way, like in the case of an undeveloped thermal breeze close to shore. This might happen when the land heats slowly causing the sea breeze to build and shift right slowly, and then at a certain point the cold air from the sea breeze cuts off the thermal circulation, speed drops quickly and the shift goes back left, hard. Without the sea breeze to cool the land, now it heats back up and the cycle repeats. Other times, we might see a random, gradient breeze where the wind shifts 5 degrees left, then 5 right, then 5 left, and then 5 MORE left, and 5 right. This less systematic shift pattern tells us something about the wind that we can use to help predict the type of day, and also might make us more hesitant to tack on the average because it might flick back into a header on the new tack as soon as we go.

All of this can be a bit overwhelming at first, but like I said, the key is practice.

Here are a few questions that you should be asking on a regular basis to help you make use of the compass.

The first one that I ask all the time as the tactician is, "Where are we in our range?" Basically I'm asking my helmsman or someone designated to watch the numbers, what range we've been seeing, and whether they think we're lifted or headed. If we've written down 190-205 as our range on starboard, and they've been watching the compass, and our number has been hovering around 202, 203, 204, they might report, "We've been seeing about 203 - pretty high in our range." And if they're really over achieving they might say something about the average number or what they think a header looks like, so maybe, "195 is average angle, and 190 was the lowest we saw before racing."

In response, one thing that I like to talk to my team about, is what number we're looking for. Again, this will depend on what you think the wind is doing and where you are on the course. If you're getting close to an edge, you might be willing to tack on a small header, so you might let them know, "We're looking for 195 - happy to take anything under that." Or you might see a big left angle up the course on cruising boats so you might tell them, "We're going to be patient here and wait to see pretty down numbers. I think we're going to see 190 again."

As you get to the top of the course, something that is important to consider is how LONG you have been in a phase for. If you just saw a right shift, you might expect the wind to spend some time in that phase before it comes back, so it might be the final shift of the beat. On the other hand, if it has been in that phase for several minutes, maybe you expect it to come back soon. This is something that you'll learn from spending more time watching the compass and understanding the wind on a particular day.

The best tacticians have spent enough time looking at the compass that they develop an intuitive sense for the size and length of the shifts that they're looking for on a given day. They recognize that the compass can tell you a lot about what the wind is doing and that helps them make a call on the type of day. They use the compass a little bit differently depending on the type of day. We're going to look at all of this in more detail as we get into the five types of day.
