Tactics of the Outside Track

When you identify the type of day as an Outside Track day, the tactical game becomes one of lane preservation and balancing how important it is to get to the favored side with how important it is to have a clear lane. In the earlier section on the outside track strategy, we discussed the importance of evaluating how much clear air is the right amount of clear air, but sometimes you need to tough it out in bad air for a while to get to the favored side. This is where it can really pay to have some tactical tricks up your sleeve.

In particular, in this situation blockers become a big part of the game, and the next play will give an example of how a blocker might be used to ensure that your lane doesn't get taken away later in the beat.

UW 3.1 -- Find A Blocker To The Favored Side

Guiding Principle(s): Outside track.

The Play: Red should duck Blue and use her as a blocker to go to the left, that way there is no way for Yellow to bounce Red back right. In this scenario, Yellow is essentially looking to execute UW 1.1, so the high-percentage move accounts for Yellow's likely next move. In this situation Yellow will likely lee-bow Blue and force them to tack out, or at least make it very hard for her to sail full speed.

If there is a line of boats above Blue that Red would have to deal with if she ducked Blue, Red should tack as early as possible to force Yellow to decide whether to tack or duck.  If Yellow lee-bows, then Red might have a chance to survive by double-tacking.

Most Common Mistakes: The obvious mistake here occurs when Red fails to account for Yellow's presence. If Red lee-bows Blue, and then Yellow lee-bows Red, chances are good that Red (being the sandwiched boat) will get shot out the back and have to tack away.

Pro Tip: The key to making this play happen as effectively as possible is knowing exactly how far past Blue you must sail in order to live on her hip. Go too far and you lose leverage toward the favored side as well as control of when the other two boats tack, while not going far enough can result in an early exit due to bad air from Blue. For the best chances of success, master your ducking maneuvers, as well as your tacks, and be sure to spend some time practicing sailing in a tight lane!

Best Communication: "Need a blocker back left," "Blue is our blocker," "Tacking to pin after Blue"

In addition to using blockers on the race course, it is important to think about how to preserve your lane once you get to layline, as outside track race courses often necessitate early layline arrival. While the next play isn't exclusively an Outside Track play, it is an important one to have in the tool bag any time you get to layline early, and you'll often need to use it on the outside track.

WM 6.1 -- Live On Lay Line By Attacking Port Threats

Guiding Principle(s): Small gains at the mark rounding pay big in the escape
from the mark.

The Play: When you get to lay line early, any extra boat handling will result in a big loss -- not only will you be doing extra maneuvers, you'll be sailing extra distance as well -- so it's critical to manage nearby competitors correctly in order to survive. The goal of this play is to avoid a brutal lee-bow, by creating space to leeward, buying yourself clear air, and the ability to live to the mark. In the best case scenario, you'll force your competition to either tack shy of lay, or go behind you, but even if they live to round the mark ahead of you, you'll be in a much better position for the downwind leg. The key here is building speed early with a bow-down mode. The more speed you have, the more difficult it will be for Blue to judge where they need to tack, which will generally result in them tacking early. Once Blue commits to the tack, burn your speed in a high mode, to lift back into a higher lane and create even more space.

Most Common Mistakes: Success here requires an aggressive mindset; the harder you attack the port tacker, and the more speed you can generate, the more difficult their life will be. This move can work in so many situations, but a tentative approach will only result in giving away gauge on the mark. Be aggressive and commit to your play!

Pro Tip: A good discussion to have before every race is how much risk versus reward is in each corner of the course. When current is pushing up course, and there is a current gradient across the course, oftentimes, the corner with favorable current will be very high risk but very high reward. In these situations, getting to lay line early can pay big if you have the tactical tools to survive, so be aggressive, and go for the big rewards, but use your tactics (definitely keep this play in mind!) to mitigate risk.

It can be slightly more difficult to make this decision when you are barely laying; putting the bow down might kill your chance of making the mark. The discussion that will help make the decision should be about how critical it is to sail in clear air. If you have a long way to go before you round the mark, clear air is king, but if you'll be rounding in the next thirty seconds, maybe it's better to suck it up, stay high, and let the lee bow happen to ensure you make it around the mark.

Best Communication:

"Incoming threat on port tack," "We need to live here; we're on lay line," "We have quite a while left on starboard lay line -- clear air is the priority," "Create a lane here," "Bow down - attack mode"
