An important thing to recognize is that often in edge out conditions, the top 10 teams at the first weather mark will be fairly evenly split between the left and the right sides unless there is an underlying advantage making one side stronger than the other. As a result, if you find yourself near the top of the fleet, there is often a time at the top of the course when you have the option to switch from edging out to one side of the course to edging out to the other. Depending on how many boats are still on your ladder rung, there may be an opportunity to play through (especially if there are fewer boats near you). If playing through allows you to lead into the long tack at the top of the course, this can often be a good move. For example, let's imagine that you have edged out left for the first two thirds of the beat. Your race is going well, and you're solidly in the top ten as you enter the last third of the beat. The opportunity presents itself for you to duck a few boats to edge out right, and port is the long tack from where you are on the course. This might be a good play, if it allows you to lead a majority of those top 10 boats that you're racing against into a side that you have more opportunity on (more time before you're forced to tack on the layline). This last part of the beat is an important moment to bet on what your eyes tell you. If you see pressure, don't be afraid to switch sides at the end.

Starting

My most common advice on Edge Out days is, "Race to the first feature." This becomes much easier to execute if you can start close to the side that you think will pay. Teams who start closer to the middle in these conditions often spend the first half of the beat battling towards and edge of the fleet, and by the top, half, find themselves with few options left. While it is possible to battle to an edge from the middle, the earlier you make it to the edge of the fleet, the better your lane will be in the difficult moments, and the easier your race will be. It pays in this condition to know how to win an end, so do your homework in practice, and use your skills to own your side!

The Boat-End-Start-Edge-Out-Left Gameplan

One special case that comes up often, and is worth discussing, is what to do when you identify an Edge Out Left strategy, but the pin is super crowded, or the boat end is meaningfully favored. In either of these scenarios, one possible gameplan might be to start at the boat end, and battle towards the top left edge. One piece of advice that you'll hear from coaches quite often in these conditions, is that it's easier to go to the side that you start on, so you might want to think twice before starting at the boat end and battling for the top left, however, there are definitely times when you need to make it happen, so it's important to know what to look for when you do.

Let's use an example where your betting odds are 60/40 left, but the pin is very crowded on a fairly square line. You decide that the risk factor from battling for the pin isn't worth the possible reward. You could shift half way up the line, but then you'd be in the middle of the fleet, and you'd be following the top pack into the left. Instead, one option is to start near the boat end, where you can play the Edge Out strategy on the right side of the left pack. This can be a strong position, especially in the first two thirds of the beat, because you will have freedom to tack, allowing you to cross boats from the left when you feel strong, and lead the pack when you feel weak. The issue usually comes in the final third of the course, when the right pack and the left pack converge. Near the top of the course, if you are still to the right side of the left pack, or the left side of the right pack as the fleet comes back together, you'll be stuck in the middle between the hammer and the anvil... As such, it is critical to work your way to an outside edge before the final third of the beat, even if that means cutting your losses at some point and finding a spot to punch through.

First Tack

One of the most important things you can do in Edge Out conditions, is to bring the first shift back towards the middle when you feel strong. The idea of this strategy is that everyone across the course will have moments where they feel lifted in pressure, and look good as a result. If you can play from the edges, the advantage is not about having pressure that the rest of the fleet doesn't have, but it's about giving yourself the opportunity to stay alive when you don't look strong. By pushing the game back towards the center as soon as possible when you do look strong, you'll take advantage of momentary strength to force a lot of your competition to sail in bad air, or tack before they get the shift they're looking for. The earlier you can start forcing the boats in the middle to fight with each other, the more likely you are to have an advantage at the next cross, and the stronger your position will be to continue to control the race. If you take the first tack back with strength, and a lot of the fleet decides to play through rather than leading you back to the center, consider a tight cover back towards the edge.

Plan B

If you don't get off the line cleanly, the key to a good plan B in the Edge Out strategy is figuring out how to work your way out to an edge. Generally, you should look to tack quickly on shifts that will take you to the edge, and dig a bit more into shifts that are going to send you back into the middle. This might mean going against the shift a bit longer than you would like, but it will be a longer term investment in positioning that will start to pay off as you work your way up the course.

Another way to think about this same idea is to think about how you will deal with close crosses. On an inside track day, we said that the goal is to "crowd source" decision making by never crossing anyone and never getting crossed by anyone. This means that on inside track days, we almost always "lead back" packs of boats. In contrast, on the Edge Out day, we only lead back close crosses when it takes us towards the edge of our group. On close crosses back towards the middle, the move is generally to play through to get closer to the edge, and then "hip up" on the competition. 2016 Olympian Riley Gibbs thinks about this as an arrow shape, where the question is whether to be inside of the arrow or outside of the arrow.

One thing to keep in mind is that the plan B is much more difficult in this condition the closer you are to the middle of the starting line, so don't let yourself get pushed into the middle of the line.

Downwind

Downwind in this condition, we follow many of the same rules as upwind, with one big difference: downwind we will encounter fewer pressure changes and angle changes because we are moving with the wind, so it is critical to take advantage of each one. To help achieve this, one of the first rules of thumb downwind in this condition is to get onto the long gybe early. Just like upwind, this gives you more opportunities for the randomness to go your direction before you reach layline, so when in doubt at the top mark, get on the long gybe early.

Once on the long gybe, the goal is to find a nice lifting puff to gybe in. If that puff arrives early in the leg, take it. If you have to wait all the way until the corner to get it, be patient. Chances are good that you'll only have a few opportunities to make the gain.

In these conditions, making the correct decision on the straight set versus the gybe set is particularly important because if you can hook into the pressure and shift, it will immediately put you on a different ladder rung.

Second Beat

On the second beat of an edge out race course, an interesting thing often happens: because the fleet is now spread out, the edge out strategy doesn't work the same way that it does when the fleet is tight. On the first beat, making gains was all about keeping your air clear when you were weak and forcing your competition to sail in more traffic when you were strong. But as the fleet spreads out, traffic gets thinner, everyone at the front of the fleet has a pretty good lane. This means that you can no longer rely on the same mechanism to make gains. When the fleet thins out (which sometimes happens as early as the first beat), the game becomes more about staying lifted, and trying to lead the pack on the long tack.

To set yourself up for this strategy, it's helpful to start thinking about which tack is going to be the long tack before you reach the leeward gate. If the gate is square to the average wind direction, then the long tack will be defined by the shift at the bottom, so you'll likely need to round the favored mark and tack immediately.

One passing lane to look for in these conditions is the lane that gets created by teams who round the favored gate, but wait to see what the boats behind do before tacking. If you can round and tack before the boat ahead of you tacks, you'll be leading on the long tack, where you can be patient and wait for a good shift to tack on.
