Type 4: Edge Out

Okay, so we've talked about situations where pressure matters, where shift matters, and where there is a place to race to, but what if both pressure and shift matter? Have you ever come in from a day of sailing and felt like you were torn all day between tacking on the shifts or waiting it out for more pressure? If you find yourself making this evaluation, it's likely that you're sailing in an Edge Out condition. We often see this condition in gradient wind, and in most of the venues that you'll sail in, this will likely make up the majority of your racing. Oddly, this is also generally the worst understood strategy of them all.

The Edge Out strategy can be challenging because you'll have moments where you have both pressure and shift making you look good, followed by moments where you don't have either, or you only have one of the two. In this condition, the top teams often comment that they're trusting their instincts to decide where to go, but this approach makes it hard to learn how to become one of the top teams! Trying to predict the wind is generally very difficult in this condition, so instead, we need to play a special form of fleet management designed to consolidate strength and keep options open in moments of weakness. We'll get into the strategy in a minute, but first, let's dig into how we identify Edge Out conditions.

Edge Out conditions are characterized by two or more unpredictable features per leg, as is often the case in a gradient-driven breeze. In previous sections, we've discussed how to tell the difference between a gradient wind and a thermal, and if the morning forecast shows a setup for a moderate gradient breeze, the edge out strategy should be top of mind. One common mantra in this condition is, "Win your side," so if you hear coaches repeating this line, it might be a hint that they're seeing an edge out condition.

The other piece of advice that fits closely on this type of day is, "Sail the long tack first." This goes back to the thought experiment posed at the beginning of this chapter: "How would you win on an infinitely long race course?" The idea behind this thought experiment is that on an infinitely long race course, you could wait as long as you needed to, to get a big enough shift to put you in the lead before tacking. On a random day, if you can lead the fleet on the long tack off of the starting line, chances are good that you'll get a favorable shift before you get to layline, and you can use this shift to come back at your competition with an advantage. This is particularly true with fewer, or longer shifts on a beat.

The Edge Out strategy can also be relevant when it is difficult to see pressure differences on the water. For example, the strategy works well on connect the dots days if you can't see the pressure well. Pressure might be the dominant feature, but if it's really hard to see the pressure differences visually, your gains and losses may become more random and less predictable.

The key to making high percentage decisions on an Edge Out day is to understand where to look for opportunities to make gains, and how to lock in gains once they've been made. Specifically, being near an outside edge of the fleet or a pack of boats gives you the ability to sail towards an edge of the course  in clear air, even if you are not strong on the boats around you, whereas the boats in the middle are forced to try to live in tough lanes. Then when you get your shift in pressure, and feel strong, you can head back towards the center to push the fleet together. Boats in the middle of a pack might look good at moments, but their ability to tack to consolidate gains will be compromised by traffic, and their ability to sail in clear air when they are weak will be almost non-existent. Keep in mind however, that because these days are inherently shifty, the edges are risky. This means that when we're strong, we want to stay off of laylines so that we don't sail extra distance.

The strategy can be summed up as follows: sail on the edges of the fleet, but avoid the corners of the course by herding the fleet back to the middle when you are strong. Tack away from the fleet when you are weak, and take strength back towards your competition.

To execute this strategy well, you should try to work hard in the pre-start to understand which phase you are in at the gun and which end of the line is favored. Fight for the favored end of the line, and prioritize starting on the edge of that side so that you can lead into the first feature. If you can win the favored end, it is worth a lot more in this condition than in many other conditions because you'll be on the edge of your group from the start. Gains in this condition come from forcing your competition to fight for lanes in the middle, so the earlier you can start to pinch people off, and herd the fleet back towards the middle, the more room you will have to work with, and the easier your job will get.

In the example above, let's say that we looked up the course and determined that the pressure is either slightly better on the left or fairly uniform across the course. We would want to start closest to the left edge of the course, and importantly, we want to make our way to the outside edge of our group.

To stay in a high percentage position, your goal is to be on the outside edge of your group (the left edge if you're to the left of the center of the course; right edge if you're to the right), while "herding" the fleet away from laylines as it will be shifty and unpredictable.

One trick here is to talk about who you are racing against. Unlike in a steady thermal oscillation, in unpredictable conditions, there will be less of a consensus within the fleet about which tack to be on, so there will likely be moments where you have to decide whether to tack on a boat that's playing through your line towards the edge of the fleet, or let them go so that you can consolidate teams closer to the center. If a boat on your ladder rung pushes towards your edge of the course, the decision should be pretty easy - you'll likely want to lead them. However, if it's a tight race and one or two boats try to play beyond your line to get towards the edge of the fleet, you'll be forced to decide whether to edge out more or continue consolidateing towards the middle. To help make this decision, discuss which boats around you are the main threats.

Depending on the day, the size of the shifts, the skill level of the boats around you, and how close to the top of the course you are, the decision you'll need to make is whether the boat behind has a good shot at getting you if you allow them to play through, and whether it's worth defending, by tacking towards the edge yourself, even though this puts you closer to layline.  This is where top teams who have raced in these conditions a lot develop a "gut feeling" for when to cover the teams heading towards the edges, and when to consolidate the majority of the  fleet by pushing back towards the middle.

If you are on port tack coming back towards the center of the course from the left corner, and you feel like you're in a fairly strong shift towards the top of the course, a boat crossing two boat lengths behind headed to the corner might not be a big threat, and you'll likely be better off consolidating and staying off of layline incase you have one or two more shifts in the beat. On the other hand, if this same situation plays out early in the race, farther from layline, it might be worth tight covering to send the starboard tacker back towards the center of the course, creating more traffic for your opponents, and protecting the edge of the pack. Similarly, if a boat is positioned to cross less than a boat length behind near the top of the course, you might take the tight cover because they're more of a threat, and will be more of an inconvenience for your opponents if you can send them back into traffic.

The mantra that I like to remember here is: "Stay on the edge of the fleet, but out of the corner of the course."

In this condition, it is important to realize that sometimes you may guess wrong because the condition is unpredictable, but you need to "keep betting" on the side that you think will pay. At the end of the day, you'll be correct more often than if you stop betting.
