Type 4: Edge Out

Okay, so we've talked about situations where pressure matters, where shift matters, and where there is a place to race to, but what if both pressure and shift matter? Have you ever come in from a day of sailing and felt like you were torn all day between tacking on the shifts or waiting it out for more pressure? If you find yourself making this evaluation, it's likely that you're sailing in an Edge Out condition. We often see this condition in gradient wind, and in most of the venues that you'll sail in, this will likely make up the majority of your racing. Oddly, this is also generally the worst understood strategy of them all.

The Edge Out strategy can be challenging because you'll have moments where you have both pressure and shift making you look good, followed by moments where you don't have either, or you only have one of the two. In this condition, the top teams often comment that they're trusting their instincts to decide where to go, but this approach makes it hard to learn how to become one of the top teams! Trying to predict the wind is generally very difficult in this condition, so instead, we need to play a special form of fleet management designed to consolidate strength and keep options open in moments of weakness. We'll get into the strategy in a minute, but first, let's dig into how we identify Edge Out conditions.

Edge Out conditions are characterized by two or more unpredictable features per leg, as is often the case in a gradient-driven breeze. In previous sections, we've discussed how to tell the difference between a gradient wind and a thermal, and if the morning forecast shows a setup for a moderate gradient breeze, the edge out strategy should be top of mind. One common mantra in this condition is, "Win your side," so if you hear coaches repeating this line, it might be a hint that they're seeing an edge out condition.

The other piece of advice that fits closely on this type of day is, "Sail the long tack first." This goes back to the thought experiment posed at the beginning of this chapter: "How would you win on an infinitely long race course?" The idea behind this thought experiment is that on an infinitely long race course, you could wait as long as you needed to, to get a big enough shift to put you in the lead before tacking. On a random day, if you can lead the fleet on the long tack off of the starting line, chances are good that you'll get a favorable shift before you get to layline, and you can use this shift to come back at your competition with an advantage. This is particularly true with fewer, or longer shifts on a beat.

The Edge Out strategy can also be relevant when it is difficult to see pressure differences on the water. For example, the strategy works well on connect the dots days if you can't see the pressure well. Pressure might be the dominant feature, but if it's really hard to see the pressure differences visually, your gains and losses may become more random and less predictable.

The key to making high percentage decisions on an Edge Out day is to understand where to look for opportunities to make gains, and how to lock in gains once they've been made. Specifically, being near an outside edge of the fleet or a pack of boats gives you the ability to sail towards an edge of the course  in clear air, even if you are not strong on the boats around you, whereas the boats in the middle are forced to try to live in tough lanes. Then when you get your shift in pressure, and feel strong, you can head back towards the center to push the fleet together. Boats in the middle of a pack might look good at moments, but their ability to tack to consolidate gains will be compromised by traffic, and their ability to sail in clear air when they are weak will be almost non-existent. Keep in mind however, that because these days are inherently shifty, the edges are risky. This means that when we're strong, we want to stay off of laylines so that we don't sail extra distance.

The strategy can be summed up as follows: sail on the edges of the fleet, but avoid the corners of the course by herding the fleet back to the middle when you are strong. Tack away from the fleet when you are weak, and take strength back towards your competition.

To execute this strategy well, you should try to work hard in the pre-start to understand which phase you are in at the gun and which end of the line is favored. Fight for the favored end of the line, and prioritize starting on the edge of that side so that you can lead into the first feature. If you can win the favored end, it is worth a lot more in this condition than in many other conditions because you'll be on the edge of your group from the start. Gains in this condition come from forcing your competition to fight for lanes in the middle, so the earlier you can start to pinch people off, and herd the fleet back towards the middle, the more room you will have to work with, and the easier your job will get.

In the example above, let's say that we looked up the course and determined that the pressure is either slightly better on the left or fairly uniform across the course. We would want to start closest to the left edge of the course, and importantly, we want to make our way to the outside edge of our group.

To stay in a high percentage position, your goal is to be on the outside edge of your group (the left edge if you're to the left of the center of the course; right edge if you're to the right), while "herding" the fleet away from laylines as it will be shifty and unpredictable.

One trick here is to talk about who you are racing against. Unlike in a steady thermal oscillation, in unpredictable conditions, there will be less of a consensus within the fleet about which tack to be on, so there will likely be moments where you have to decide whether to tack on a boat that's playing through your line towards the edge of the fleet, or let them go so that you can consolidate teams closer to the center. If a boat on your ladder rung pushes towards your edge of the course, the decision should be pretty easy - you'll likely want to lead them. However, if it's a tight race and one or two boats try to play beyond your line to get towards the edge of the fleet, you'll be forced to decide whether to edge out more or continue consolidateing towards the middle. To help make this decision, discuss which boats around you are the main threats.

Depending on the day, the size of the shifts, the skill level of the boats around you, and how close to the top of the course you are, the decision you'll need to make is whether the boat behind has a good shot at getting you if you allow them to play through, and whether it's worth defending, by tacking towards the edge yourself, even though this puts you closer to layline.  This is where top teams who have raced in these conditions a lot develop a "gut feeling" for when to cover the teams heading towards the edges, and when to consolidate the majority of the  fleet by pushing back towards the middle.

If you are on port tack coming back towards the center of the course from the left corner, and you feel like you're in a fairly strong shift towards the top of the course, a boat crossing two boat lengths behind headed to the corner might not be a big threat, and you'll likely be better off consolidating and staying off of layline incase you have one or two more shifts in the beat. On the other hand, if this same situation plays out early in the race, farther from layline, it might be worth tight covering to send the starboard tacker back towards the center of the course, creating more traffic for your opponents, and protecting the edge of the pack. Similarly, if a boat is positioned to cross less than a boat length behind near the top of the course, you might take the tight cover because they're more of a threat, and will be more of an inconvenience for your opponents if you can send them back into traffic.

The mantra that I like to remember here is: "Stay on the edge of the fleet, but out of the corner of the course."

In this condition, it is important to realize that sometimes you may guess wrong because the condition is unpredictable, but you need to "keep betting" on the side that you think will pay. At the end of the day, you'll be correct more often than if you stop betting.

An important thing to recognize is that often in edge out conditions, the top 10 teams at the first weather mark will be fairly evenly split between the left and the right sides unless there is an underlying advantage making one side stronger than the other. As a result, if you find yourself near the top of the fleet, there is often a time at the top of the course when you have the option to switch from edging out to one side of the course to edging out to the other. Depending on how many boats are still on your ladder rung, there may be an opportunity to play through (especially if there are fewer boats near you). If playing through allows you to lead into the long tack at the top of the course, this can often be a good move. For example, let's imagine that you have edged out left for the first two thirds of the beat. Your race is going well, and you're solidly in the top ten as you enter the last third of the beat. The opportunity presents itself for you to duck a few boats to edge out right, and port is the long tack from where you are on the course. This might be a good play, if it allows you to lead a majority of those top 10 boats that you're racing against into a side that you have more opportunity on (more time before you're forced to tack on the layline). This last part of the beat is an important moment to bet on what your eyes tell you. If you see pressure, don't be afraid to switch sides at the end.

Starting

My most common advice on Edge Out days is, "Race to the first feature." This becomes much easier to execute if you can start close to the side that you think will pay. Teams who start closer to the middle in these conditions often spend the first half of the beat battling towards and edge of the fleet, and by the top, half, find themselves with few options left. While it is possible to battle to an edge from the middle, the earlier you make it to the edge of the fleet, the better your lane will be in the difficult moments, and the easier your race will be. It pays in this condition to know how to win an end, so do your homework in practice, and use your skills to own your side!

The Boat-End-Start-Edge-Out-Left Gameplan

One special case that comes up often, and is worth discussing, is what to do when you identify an Edge Out Left strategy, but the pin is super crowded, or the boat end is meaningfully favored. In either of these scenarios, one possible gameplan might be to start at the boat end, and battle towards the top left edge. One piece of advice that you'll hear from coaches quite often in these conditions, is that it's easier to go to the side that you start on, so you might want to think twice before starting at the boat end and battling for the top left, however, there are definitely times when you need to make it happen, so it's important to know what to look for when you do.

Let's use an example where your betting odds are 60/40 left, but the pin is very crowded on a fairly square line. You decide that the risk factor from battling for the pin isn't worth the possible reward. You could shift half way up the line, but then you'd be in the middle of the fleet, and you'd be following the top pack into the left. Instead, one option is to start near the boat end, where you can play the Edge Out strategy on the right side of the left pack. This can be a strong position, especially in the first two thirds of the beat, because you will have freedom to tack, allowing you to cross boats from the left when you feel strong, and lead the pack when you feel weak. The issue usually comes in the final third of the course, when the right pack and the left pack converge. Near the top of the course, if you are still to the right side of the left pack, or the left side of the right pack as the fleet comes back together, you'll be stuck in the middle between the hammer and the anvil... As such, it is critical to work your way to an outside edge before the final third of the beat, even if that means cutting your losses at some point and finding a spot to punch through.

First Tack

One of the most important things you can do in Edge Out conditions, is to bring the first shift back towards the middle when you feel strong. The idea of this strategy is that everyone across the course will have moments where they feel lifted in pressure, and look good as a result. If you can play from the edges, the advantage is not about having pressure that the rest of the fleet doesn't have, but it's about giving yourself the opportunity to stay alive when you don't look strong. By pushing the game back towards the center as soon as possible when you do look strong, you'll take advantage of momentary strength to force a lot of your competition to sail in bad air, or tack before they get the shift they're looking for. The earlier you can start forcing the boats in the middle to fight with each other, the more likely you are to have an advantage at the next cross, and the stronger your position will be to continue to control the race. If you take the first tack back with strength, and a lot of the fleet decides to play through rather than leading you back to the center, consider a tight cover back towards the edge.

Plan B

If you don't get off the line cleanly, the key to a good plan B in the Edge Out strategy is figuring out how to work your way out to an edge. Generally, you should look to tack quickly on shifts that will take you to the edge, and dig a bit more into shifts that are going to send you back into the middle. This might mean going against the shift a bit longer than you would like, but it will be a longer term investment in positioning that will start to pay off as you work your way up the course.

Another way to think about this same idea is to think about how you will deal with close crosses. On an inside track day, we said that the goal is to "crowd source" decision making by never crossing anyone and never getting crossed by anyone. This means that on inside track days, we almost always "lead back" packs of boats. In contrast, on the Edge Out day, we only lead back close crosses when it takes us towards the edge of our group. On close crosses back towards the middle, the move is generally to play through to get closer to the edge, and then "hip up" on the competition. 2016 Olympian Riley Gibbs thinks about this as an arrow shape, where the question is whether to be inside of the arrow or outside of the arrow.

One thing to keep in mind is that the plan B is much more difficult in this condition the closer you are to the middle of the starting line, so don't let yourself get pushed into the middle of the line.

Downwind

Downwind in this condition, we follow many of the same rules as upwind, with one big difference: downwind we will encounter fewer pressure changes and angle changes because we are moving with the wind, so it is critical to take advantage of each one. To help achieve this, one of the first rules of thumb downwind in this condition is to get onto the long gybe early. Just like upwind, this gives you more opportunities for the randomness to go your direction before you reach layline, so when in doubt at the top mark, get on the long gybe early.

Once on the long gybe, the goal is to find a nice lifting puff to gybe in. If that puff arrives early in the leg, take it. If you have to wait all the way until the corner to get it, be patient. Chances are good that you'll only have a few opportunities to make the gain.

In these conditions, making the correct decision on the straight set versus the gybe set is particularly important because if you can hook into the pressure and shift, it will immediately put you on a different ladder rung.

Second Beat

On the second beat of an edge out race course, an interesting thing often happens: because the fleet is now spread out, the edge out strategy doesn't work the same way that it does when the fleet is tight. On the first beat, making gains was all about keeping your air clear when you were weak and forcing your competition to sail in more traffic when you were strong. But as the fleet spreads out, traffic gets thinner, everyone at the front of the fleet has a pretty good lane. This means that you can no longer rely on the same mechanism to make gains. When the fleet thins out (which sometimes happens as early as the first beat), the game becomes more about staying lifted, and trying to lead the pack on the long tack.

To set yourself up for this strategy, it's helpful to start thinking about which tack is going to be the long tack before you reach the leeward gate. If the gate is square to the average wind direction, then the long tack will be defined by the shift at the bottom, so you'll likely need to round the favored mark and tack immediately.

One passing lane to look for in these conditions is the lane that gets created by teams who round the favored gate, but wait to see what the boats behind do before tacking. If you can round and tack before the boat ahead of you tacks, you'll be leading on the long tack, where you can be patient and wait for a good shift to tack on.

After rounding the gate, focus on staying lifted. On puffy, shifty days, there are often several shifts per beat, so if you are diligent about staying lifted, you can make big gains. In my experience, boats who play the fleet too much here lose out to those who just focus on staying lifted, even though it might have worked on the first beat to pay more attention to fleet management. If you're not sure what phase you're in, or which way the shift is going to go next, get back on the long tack, and wait until you feel strong again!
