Making Your Bet: Course Geometry

Course geometry can have a big impact on your race course strategy, and it's one piece of homework that often gets overlooked. When we talk about course geometry, we're talking about how square the marks are to the wind and to each other -  how square the starting line is to the wind axis, or how square the gates are. I like to draw a picture on the deck to ensure that I don't miss anything and so that I don't have to hold all of the numbers in my head. Using your compass, you'll want to measure the bearing from the starting line to the weather mark, the bearing from one end of the starting line to the other and the bearing of the gate.

I like to report the gate and the starting line bearing as the perpendicular angle rather than the sighted angle so that we're comparing apples to apples when we talk about wind directions. If the bearing from the pin end back to the boat end is 275° for example, I would subtract 90° so that I know the line is square to a wind direction of 185°.

Course geometry is important because it helps us keep our options open in shifty conditions. One question that I like to ask before every race is, "Where is the risk on this race course?" In most conditions, getting to the corners too early in a beat eliminates options and increases the chance of over-standing lay lines. Let's say the windward mark is skewed right so that you'll be sailing a lot of port tack, and not much starboard. In this case, there is more risk on the left side of the course because the corner will come up on you really quickly. So the rule of thumb here is that when in doubt, sailing the long tack first will keep your options open.

The idea of sailing the long tack or long gybe first is one that you'll hear a lot, and it's worth understanding why it works so often. To think about this idea, think about a typical one nautical mile race track. On a square course, any boat sailing up that track will spend 50% of their time on starboard and 50% of their time on port. With 5 degrees of skew those numbers change so that that long tack accounts for 55% of the beat while the short is only 45%. Skew 10 degrees, and now 59% of the beat will be spent on the long tack, while only 41% will be sailed on the short tack. In terms of a 49er race, where the target time for a beat is about seven minutes, this translates into an extra 1:16 on the long tack compared to the short tack.

Now think about how many times you've been racing upwind, waiting for your shift to come, hoping and praying that it comes before you get to layline... The advantage of sailing the long tack first, is that it buys you time for the shift to go your direction.

For me, course geometry can be a really helpful tie breaker if I'm looking up a race course, and I can't really tell which side has more pressure. If I'm sailing an inside track strategy or an edge out strategy with equal pressure across the course, and I have low confidence in what the weather is doing, the next question is always, is there more port or starboard in this beat? If the weather mark is skewed, then I'll favor the side that keeps me centered up relative to the mark for longer. For example, if the weather mark is skewed right by 5 degrees in gradient wind, I might play the edge out right strategy, because the left edge of the fleet will get to the port lay line sooner, giving the boats on the right more options and opportunities.

One obvious advantage of knowing your course geometry is if  you can identify a bias in the leeward gate. Often the gate is set before racing starts, and if you can measure the bias ahead of time, you'll have a much better chance of picking the correct gate at the bottom of your run.

Something that we touched on briefly when talking about venue research, callbooks and geographic effects, is how the course geometry relates to the shoreline. In almost any breeze, there are some rules of thumb around how the wind changes near land. Whether you're sailing in a thermal sea breeze, or a gradient, you'll want to know which tack or gybe takes you towards land faster or which one gets you off shore. At the J70 Worlds at Cal Yacht Club, the course was often set at a slight right tilt to the shoreline, so that Starboard tack took you offshore slightly quicker than port tack. This was almost impossible to see from our vantage point on the water, but we spent a lot of time looking at our GPS tracks, so we knew that this was a feature of the course. There were several days where the strategy was a bit of a tossup between edging out right or edging out left - looking upwind, the pressure looked the same on both sides - but knowing that starboard took us out to the ocean, we favored that tack if we expected to be sailing in a gradient because even though we didn't see much pressure difference on the water, we expected that getting offshore in the gradient would give us just a bit more pressure. In these situations we played an edge out left strategy, and it worked out more often than not.

Finally, knowing the course geometry before the start can also help you adapt to changing conditions if you need to revise your bet. One situation that happens a lot in Southern California, is a transition from a southerly, morning gradient wind, to the thermal in the afternoon. If you find yourself sailing through the transition, knowing the bearing from the weather mark to the gate or the finish line can make a huge difference if the breeze starts to clock. Often, the question you'll need to answer is: "Should I extend around the top mark into the persistent lift to be inside the wheel on the wind shift and gain on the fleet, or do I need to gybe early here to avoid over-standing the lay line to the bottom?" If you know how square the top mark was at the start, and you knew the wind direction at the start, you can generally do some quick math with your upwind headings at the top of the course as the wind starts to clock, to estimate the wind direction, and figure out how close to the layline you'll be, and whether there will be any opportunity from extending farther.

One last piece of course geometry that I've seen play a big role in racing, from time to time is the ratio of starting line length to windward mark length. This isn't necessarily something that you need to draw with the sharpie, but it's worth thinking about how much leverage you're going to start the race with. Occasionally, on really short courses, or very long starting lines, a large percentage of your total leverage will be available right at the starting gun by starting to one side or the other. In these races, you'll need to fight hard for the side you want early on, because that first decision will have a big impact on your final leverage.

The more you make course geometry part of your pre-race homework, the more little tricks you'll pick up, and the more ways you'll find to apply it, so start carrying a compass and a sharpie and make it part of your routine every race.
