In Coronado, California, the Sea Breeze is one of the most common conditions to see year round, so focusing on the subtleties of the wind range between the South West to the West North Westerly will cover a lot of bases. Above is a page from my Coronado Callbook, focused on the building seabreeze, and the shift caused by the wind blowing over the "Silver Strand" beach to the west of the race area.

This is a good example of how a Callbook might evolve over time, after racing on a venue a number of times. Instead of assumptions about what the conditions might be like, this section has been built out to incorporate actual observations from past racing at the venue. One thing you'll see here, is that the mechanics behind the past observations have been explained rather than just saying, "When X happens, Y tends to pay." Working towards building out a deeper understanding of the mechanics behind the conditions at a particular venue will help to identify changing conditions, and again, adjust your betting odds to help predict the outcomes of changing weather factors throughout the day.

This callbook becomes a tool that I like to check each morning, and modify as we get more time on the venue to improve our models of the local knowledge. Above is an example from Saint Margaret's Bay in Nova Scotia, where the 2022 49er, 49er FX and Nacra 17 World Championships were held. After checking the forecast for the day, part of the morning routine for the teams that I was coaching at this event was to review our previous notes from the expected wind direction. Given that we saw a different direction almost every day, this was a very important exercise to help refresh our memories of what had worked the last time we saw the forecasted wind direction. At the end of each day, we added notes on how that day had played out to improve the Callbook.

Once you have your preliminary Callbook constructed, you'll be able to use the tool to help make difficult decisions when other advantages are more subtle. Let's walk through how we adjust the betting odds on a day of racing in a North Westerly breeze on Biscayne Bay in Miami.

When low pressure systems bring winter cold fronts through Miami, it is common to get one to three days of South Westerly breeze, becoming Westerly and then slowly shifting right to become North Westerly and eventually Northerly on Biscayne Bay. In the North Westerly, the wind blowing through the city often creates very shifty and very puffy wind, with super flat water close to land, and steep, tight chop as you get farther South East towards Key Biscayne. Looking upwind, the race course is often very visual because the puffs are so much bigger than the lulls, which creates either a "connect-the-dots'' type of day if the differential between puffs and lulls are big enough, or an "edge out" type of day, if the pressure differences are a bit smaller. We'll get into this a lot more later in part 2, but for the sake of this example, let's say that the puffs are around 17 knots, and the lulls are down to 14 - a significant difference, but not enough to outweigh the importance of the shifts that often accompany the pressure changes rolling off the shoreline. As a result, in this example, we're going to play this race as the "edge out" type of day. Once we have identified the type of day, the next step is to decide on how to hedge our bets. This is where the Miami Callbook and the Wind Strategy mechanics come in.

What we know from the mechanics of the wind, is that we expect to see a left shift in the wind over land, so in the case of the NW'ly, offshore breeze in Miami, we expect to see more left angle as we get closer to the land at the top of the course, and more right angle towards the bottom. In addition, in a gradient wind, we expect to see more pressure farther from shore, and lighter pressure as we get farther away from the city. As we look up the racecourse at a puffy, shifty race track, it might not be immediately apparent whether the right or left will pay, but knowing that the wind is theoretically left shifted closer to the top, I would likely shift my betting odds slightly to a, "60:40 left favored," bet before doing any testing.

On the other hand, the exact wind direction might factor in in terms of which tack might keep us in pressure longer. Depending on where your course is set, the shoreline axis might change a little bit, but in our example, let's say that our course is set about a mile east of the Coconut Grove Sailing Club, where the shoreline axis is approximately 200°. Early in the cold front, the wind direction might be left of perpendicular to that axis (i.e. left of 290°), and if this is the case, Port will take us closer to land sooner, potentially taking us out of pressure due to our theoretical expectation about more pressure offshore in gradient winds. Starboard will keep us offshore for longer, so in this case, maybe we modify the betting odds to favor the left a little bit more than our previous assessment: maybe instead of, "60:40 left," we adjust our bet to "65:35 left." What we're essentially saying here is that while we expect both sides to be in play, the left might have a decent edge over the course of the day.

What I like to tell sailors that I'm coaching on this type of day is that it's likely a day where it seems random in the moment because of the puffy shifty conditions, but when you look back on the day as a whole, you'll often realize that the left was actually pretty strong on average, and that teams who played the right had to work harder and be more precise about connecting the dots to come out ahead. This mindset will keep you open to opportunities from either side, but will help you settle the low margin decisions with more confidence than you might otherwise have.

As the cold front progresses through Miami, the wind ticks slowly to the right. Often this shift is too slow to matter over an hour long race, but what it does change is how the wind axis relates to the shoreline axis. As the wind gets to the right of perpendicular to the shoreline axis, now Starboard tack takes us closer to land sooner, and Port theoretically keeps us in more wind for longer. In this case, we need to shift our betting odds back in the opposite direction: instead of, "65:35 left", now the theoretical odds change to, "55:45 right." This is a much tighter margin, so your conviction in one side should probably be weaker, and other factors might be more likely to sway your decision making.

One of the most important advantages that top teams take advantage of in these tight margin races is the psychological confidence that comes from knowing that either side could come  in, and that often times the best you can do is to win your side and hope the final shift and puff go your way. This makes it easier to shake it off and focus on the next play when things go wrong. Sometimes we talk about needing to be a "goldfish" with a short memory on these days.

This should not mean that we abandon our type of day strategy to try to sail up the middle of the course because we're not sure which side will pay! Instead, it means that we should stick to our guns - bet on edging out left, and play our strategy well. If the right comes in at the top, chances are pretty good that the left won't be far behind and that the top 10 teams will include boats from either side who "won their side." An added benefit is that often this means that fewer teams will be tempted to fight hard for the pin end, because they don't see a strong reason to bet on the left. This can make the "edge out left" strategy easier for you to execute!

In this example that I gave, I nudged the betting odds 10% left or right due to expected shift geographies (the windward shoreline) - particularly because I have experience racing in Miami where I've seen this situation play out many times. I adjusted the odds 5% due to theoretical pressure differences due to the shoreline axis (port took us a bit closer to shore than starboard when TWD was left of 290°, but not a LOT closer).

After adjusting the theoretical odds, the next step would be to actually test those odds on the course. Warming up before the race I'd be looking for evidence to confirm or reject the mental model and betting odds that we've generated so far. The modification here might be an overall adjustment of 5% one way or the other based on general confidence, or it might be 5% one way or another on an individual factor like pressure based on a visual observation or a compass confirmation. For example, if I can visually confirm more pressure offshore, I might increase that component of my bet. If I see the opposite of what I expect, it might negate the theoretical bet completely, or even swing it in the opposite direction if I'm confident enough in what my eyes are telling me.

At the end of the day, how you adjust the betting odds on your boat might vary - you might treat every factor with equal weight or you might be a little bit less quantitative and more abstract. Over time, no matter how you adjust the betting odds, practicing this system of strategic hedging will improve your ability to understand how different factors will impact racing, and will improve your confidence when playing the game against other tacticians!
