Making Your Bet: Venue Research

In preparing for big regattas, one of the most important pieces of homework that you can do well ahead of time, is to research your venue. In some cases, you may be able to find local experts to help you understand the dynamics of the race course that you'll be on, but even if you can't there are still a lot of insights that you can glean with a few online tools. Let's put in place a process for venue research that you can do before any big event.

Before we dive in, if you haven't read Wind Strategy, by David Houghton and Fiona Campbell it is a must read for strategic thinking on the water and venue research beforehand. A lot of the ideas that I'm going to lay out here come straight out of Wind Strategy, and that book dives a lot deeper into the mechanics of all of this, so if any of this section seems a little bit mystical or unclear, do yourself a favor, and read Wind Strategy!

Step one when we're researching a new venue is to get a chart of the water, and a map of the land. For water charts, I generally use the Navionics app, which is available on pretty much any tablet or phone, and can generally provide you with detailed sonar soundings of the bathymetry of any venue. For topography of the surrounding land, I use topographic-map.com. Finally, I often check a Google satellite image of the area just to start to get a sense of what the surrounding land usage looks like - buildings, trees, farmland, etc. All of this will be useful when determining what different wind directions might look like.

My next stop in researching a venue is generally to visit the "Statistics" section of windfinder.com. This is a useful tool that can help to understand what the wind has historically done in a venue, but you have to be a little bit careful. The data presented on the stats page here will generally give 24 hour statistics, which might throw you off a little bit. In Long Beach for example, Wind Finder shows historical data of 0-7 knots 75% of the time during the summer. While anyone who has sailed in Long Beach knows that the summer is a super reliable, 15 knot sea breeze, the low numbers reflect the light air evenings and mornings from around 6pm to 12pm the next day - 75% of the day.

There's no substitute for a local weather guru to make sure that you're pointed in the right direction, but once you know what you're looking for, you'll feel pretty confident from looking at the Windfinder data that the thermal wind direction is generally from the SW to WSW shown above, and that July is the peak season.

Wind direction will start to hint at what might be driving the racing breeze. Compare Long Beach above, to Gulfport below.

A big difference that should jump out at you, is the fact that the Gulfport wind is far less onetrack than Long Beach. In Gulfport we see the distribution of wind directions and wind speeds spread out a lot more from every direction except maybe due West.

Knowing this, we might focus a lot of attention on the South Westerly in Long Beach, whereas in Gulfport, we're going to need our callbook to cover a number of directions.

Okay, let's get into the real work of constructing our call book. What we do now, is essentially apply the lessons from Wind Strategy to our particular venue to start making some guesses about what we might see from various wind directions. If the Windfinder homework, or discussions with locals have revealed some specific wind directions to focus on, I'll generally start with those directions, otherwise, I like to measure the orientation of the coastline at the venue, and then look at the 4 directions perpendicular or parallel to the coastline.

Here are some examples of how that looks.

The Gulfport coastline runs roughly east to west with a compass axis around 70 degrees, or a perpendicular axis of 160 degrees. As such, in the Easterly wind, you have a breeze blowing down the shoreline. Over land in the northern hemisphere, additional friction from trees and other land use increases friction between the air and the surface, so on average, wind directions over land will be left shifted relative to wind directions over the water.

In the case of Gulfport in the Easterly, what this means is that we might expect a left shifted wind over land to converge with the easterly direction over water, increasing the wind speed in a zone of convergence. If the wind were from a Westerly or WSW'ly direction we might expect the opposite, because in this case, the left shift over land pulls the wind AWAY from the wind over the water, causing a zone of divergence and lighter wind next to the shoreline. Wind Strategy explains the mechanics of this in detail, so I recommend adding the book to your reading list!

In addition to this zone of convergence, one question to consider in the easterly wind direction in Gulfport is whether the wind is thermal or gradient driven. In general, the Easterly is fairly far left of the direction that we might expect to see thermal development, so in general we would expect to see this wind develop as the result of a pressure system driven gradient wind. One expectation in gradient wind is that the best pressure will generally sit offshore, where there is less friction from the land.

If we are sailing in an Easterly breeze in Gulfport, these two features - (1) the near-shore convergence and left shift, and (2) the offshore increase in wind speed - will be features worth looking for. Depending on where your course is set, you may be too far from the shoreline to see the convergence zone, and the offshore pressure might play a big role. On the other hand, if you're closer to the shoreline, the convergence and associated left shift near land might overpower the offshore pressure to be the defining feature on the race course.

Finally, knowing the shoreline axis in the easterly can help to understand when conditions might change. In this case, the shoreline runs from 250 WSW to 70 ENE, making the perpendicular axis 160 SSE. With this in mind, the most basic factor that we should keep in mind is that Starboard tack will take us closer to shore both upwind and downwind, while Port will take us away from shore. Assuming that we're sailing a boat that tacks through 90 degrees, if the wind shifts to the right of 105 however, this dynamic changes so that both tacks take us away from the shoreline upwind, and both gybes take us closer to shore downwind.

Let's consider the convergence versus offshore pressure example above in this context. At the 2022 Viper 640 North American Championship, the final day of racing started with wind blowing from around 90 degrees, and the course was set close to shore. In the first few races of the day, the left paid big, likely as a result of a combination of convergence on the left side of the course, and slightly less adverse current in shallower water, closer to shore. Starboard tack was critical off the line because it took you to more pressure, left shift, and less adverse current. As the day continued however, the wind slowly shifted right to 105 and even had moments as far right as 115. Once right of 105, the zone of left shifted convergence was no longer on the race course, so while Starboard tack still kept you in shallow water and thus better current for longer, additional gradient pressure on the right side of the course made the race course far more even. Teams who identified this change in wind axis relative to the shoreline realized that there were now more passing lanes, opening up the course and bringing the right side into play.

By mapping out these features ahead of time we can create a better idea of what to look for and what to test on the race course before we ever get to the venue. On this particular day at the Viper 640 North Americans, the left was very strong early in the day, so it was surprising to see the right start working as the wind settled in from a few degrees farther right. Understanding the role that the shoreline axis played was critical to shifting the mindset, and understanding how to adjust the betting odds as the day progressed. Let's look at another example.

In addition to looking at the theoretical mechanics of the wind in an area, talking to local experts is one of the best ways to fast track your understanding of a venue. Above is an example of a briefing constructed from a call with a local expert in Lake Como. I find that this type of graphical layout to distill a conversation into bullet points linked to a map can help you to start visualizing a venue, and visualizing situations that might unfold on the race course. In this case I included a photo from a Google Images search of the "Lake Boats Museum" that our local expert referenced, so that we could start visualizing the building that we were trying to find on the shoreline.

The next step in developing a good Callbook is to combine the wind mechanics illustrated in the Gulfport example with the types of local knowledge that can only come from experience in a venue, or a local expert. Let's look at how your Callbook can evolve over time as you spend more time sailing on a venue and getting familiar with the features.
