Smaller margins in the betting odds may also modify your plan B gameplan, which is extremely important to articulate. Once again let's consider our example of the Miami North Westerly where we have narrowed our odds to 55:45 left. In this example we're dealing with a 10 percentage point spread - 55% left to 45% right. This is a pretty small margin when betting on a particular side of the course to play, and below a certain point, if a bad start makes it easier to execute your "type of day" strategy on the other side of the course, you might consider taking it.

With the edge out type of day, the main pillar of the racing style is getting to an outside edge of your group. Let's say we wanted to edge out left, but at the start we end up too shy on layline to the pin end, and are forced to tack and duck a big portion of the fleet. Initially our plan B will be to find a decent lane back left to start working our way towards that outside left edge of the group as we discussed earlier. But in a tight fleet, there's a decent chance that a lot of boats come off the line with good lanes, and by the time we find a lane back left, we find ourselves to the right of 70% of the fleet. In this circumstance, if the spread on our betting odds were big - let's say 65:35 left - we might still consider taking the lane back left to do our best to work that side. On the other hand, the closer we get to 50:50 odds, the more likely we might be to abandon the left, and instead focus on edging out to the right of the fleet.

Knowing when to switch the plan B is a bit of an art depending on where you are in the fleet, what type of day you think it is, starting line bias, what you've decided on as your betting odds, and how likely you think you are to be able to execute the type of day strategy on the other side. As you start to implement this system, the best rule of thumb is to err on the side of caution by trusting your original evaluation. If you thought the left was slightly favored, bet on the left and vice versa. This will ensure that you have a more reliable data point to debrief on and learn from after the race. The more you practice, however, the better you'll get at recognizing the moments when small spreads and potential line bias present the opportunity to switch your plan B to control the other side of the course than you were originally planning.

This venue based model for adjusting the betting odds is a great way to build a big picture understanding of where you're going to go race, but in the next chapter we're going to zoom in one level to look at an individual day of racing, to understand how we can utilize the weather forecast to improve our betting odds even more.
