Making Your Bet: Venue Research

In preparing for big regattas, one of the most important pieces of homework that you can do well ahead of time, is to research your venue. In some cases, you may be able to find local experts to help you understand the dynamics of the race course that you'll be on, but even if you can't there are still a lot of insights that you can glean with a few online tools. Let's put in place a process for venue research that you can do before any big event.

Before we dive in, if you haven't read Wind Strategy, by David Houghton and Fiona Campbell it is a must read for strategic thinking on the water and venue research beforehand. A lot of the ideas that I'm going to lay out here come straight out of Wind Strategy, and that book dives a lot deeper into the mechanics of all of this, so if any of this section seems a little bit mystical or unclear, do yourself a favor, and read Wind Strategy!

Step one when we're researching a new venue is to get a chart of the water, and a map of the land. For water charts, I generally use the Navionics app, which is available on pretty much any tablet or phone, and can generally provide you with detailed sonar soundings of the bathymetry of any venue. For topography of the surrounding land, I use topographic-map.com. Finally, I often check a Google satellite image of the area just to start to get a sense of what the surrounding land usage looks like - buildings, trees, farmland, etc. All of this will be useful when determining what different wind directions might look like.

My next stop in researching a venue is generally to visit the "Statistics" section of windfinder.com. This is a useful tool that can help to understand what the wind has historically done in a venue, but you have to be a little bit careful. The data presented on the stats page here will generally give 24 hour statistics, which might throw you off a little bit. In Long Beach for example, Wind Finder shows historical data of 0-7 knots 75% of the time during the summer. While anyone who has sailed in Long Beach knows that the summer is a super reliable, 15 knot sea breeze, the low numbers reflect the light air evenings and mornings from around 6pm to 12pm the next day - 75% of the day.

There's no substitute for a local weather guru to make sure that you're pointed in the right direction, but once you know what you're looking for, you'll feel pretty confident from looking at the Windfinder data that the thermal wind direction is generally from the SW to WSW shown above, and that July is the peak season.

Wind direction will start to hint at what might be driving the racing breeze. Compare Long Beach above, to Gulfport below.

A big difference that should jump out at you, is the fact that the Gulfport wind is far less onetrack than Long Beach. In Gulfport we see the distribution of wind directions and wind speeds spread out a lot more from every direction except maybe due West.

Knowing this, we might focus a lot of attention on the South Westerly in Long Beach, whereas in Gulfport, we're going to need our callbook to cover a number of directions.

Okay, let's get into the real work of constructing our call book. What we do now, is essentially apply the lessons from Wind Strategy to our particular venue to start making some guesses about what we might see from various wind directions. If the Windfinder homework, or discussions with locals have revealed some specific wind directions to focus on, I'll generally start with those directions, otherwise, I like to measure the orientation of the coastline at the venue, and then look at the 4 directions perpendicular or parallel to the coastline.

Here are some examples of how that looks.

The Gulfport coastline runs roughly east to west with a compass axis around 70 degrees, or a perpendicular axis of 160 degrees. As such, in the Easterly wind, you have a breeze blowing down the shoreline. Over land in the northern hemisphere, additional friction from trees and other land use increases friction between the air and the surface, so on average, wind directions over land will be left shifted relative to wind directions over the water.

In the case of Gulfport in the Easterly, what this means is that we might expect a left shifted wind over land to converge with the easterly direction over water, increasing the wind speed in a zone of convergence. If the wind were from a Westerly or WSW'ly direction we might expect the opposite, because in this case, the left shift over land pulls the wind AWAY from the wind over the water, causing a zone of divergence and lighter wind next to the shoreline. Wind Strategy explains the mechanics of this in detail, so I recommend adding the book to your reading list!

In addition to this zone of convergence, one question to consider in the easterly wind direction in Gulfport is whether the wind is thermal or gradient driven. In general, the Easterly is fairly far left of the direction that we might expect to see thermal development, so in general we would expect to see this wind develop as the result of a pressure system driven gradient wind. One expectation in gradient wind is that the best pressure will generally sit offshore, where there is less friction from the land.

If we are sailing in an Easterly breeze in Gulfport, these two features - (1) the near-shore convergence and left shift, and (2) the offshore increase in wind speed - will be features worth looking for. Depending on where your course is set, you may be too far from the shoreline to see the convergence zone, and the offshore pressure might play a big role. On the other hand, if you're closer to the shoreline, the convergence and associated left shift near land might overpower the offshore pressure to be the defining feature on the race course.

Finally, knowing the shoreline axis in the easterly can help to understand when conditions might change. In this case, the shoreline runs from 250 WSW to 70 ENE, making the perpendicular axis 160 SSE. With this in mind, the most basic factor that we should keep in mind is that Starboard tack will take us closer to shore both upwind and downwind, while Port will take us away from shore. Assuming that we're sailing a boat that tacks through 90 degrees, if the wind shifts to the right of 105 however, this dynamic changes so that both tacks take us away from the shoreline upwind, and both gybes take us closer to shore downwind.

Let's consider the convergence versus offshore pressure example above in this context. At the 2022 Viper 640 North American Championship, the final day of racing started with wind blowing from around 90 degrees, and the course was set close to shore. In the first few races of the day, the left paid big, likely as a result of a combination of convergence on the left side of the course, and slightly less adverse current in shallower water, closer to shore. Starboard tack was critical off the line because it took you to more pressure, left shift, and less adverse current. As the day continued however, the wind slowly shifted right to 105 and even had moments as far right as 115. Once right of 105, the zone of left shifted convergence was no longer on the race course, so while Starboard tack still kept you in shallow water and thus better current for longer, additional gradient pressure on the right side of the course made the race course far more even. Teams who identified this change in wind axis relative to the shoreline realized that there were now more passing lanes, opening up the course and bringing the right side into play.

By mapping out these features ahead of time we can create a better idea of what to look for and what to test on the race course before we ever get to the venue. On this particular day at the Viper 640 North Americans, the left was very strong early in the day, so it was surprising to see the right start working as the wind settled in from a few degrees farther right. Understanding the role that the shoreline axis played was critical to shifting the mindset, and understanding how to adjust the betting odds as the day progressed. Let's look at another example.

In addition to looking at the theoretical mechanics of the wind in an area, talking to local experts is one of the best ways to fast track your understanding of a venue. Above is an example of a briefing constructed from a call with a local expert in Lake Como. I find that this type of graphical layout to distill a conversation into bullet points linked to a map can help you to start visualizing a venue, and visualizing situations that might unfold on the race course. In this case I included a photo from a Google Images search of the "Lake Boats Museum" that our local expert referenced, so that we could start visualizing the building that we were trying to find on the shoreline.

The next step in developing a good Callbook is to combine the wind mechanics illustrated in the Gulfport example with the types of local knowledge that can only come from experience in a venue, or a local expert. Let's look at how your Callbook can evolve over time as you spend more time sailing on a venue and getting familiar with the features.

In Coronado, California, the Sea Breeze is one of the most common conditions to see year round, so focusing on the subtleties of the wind range between the South West to the West North Westerly will cover a lot of bases. Above is a page from my Coronado Callbook, focused on the building seabreeze, and the shift caused by the wind blowing over the "Silver Strand" beach to the west of the race area.

This is a good example of how a Callbook might evolve over time, after racing on a venue a number of times. Instead of assumptions about what the conditions might be like, this section has been built out to incorporate actual observations from past racing at the venue. One thing you'll see here, is that the mechanics behind the past observations have been explained rather than just saying, "When X happens, Y tends to pay." Working towards building out a deeper understanding of the mechanics behind the conditions at a particular venue will help to identify changing conditions, and again, adjust your betting odds to help predict the outcomes of changing weather factors throughout the day.

This callbook becomes a tool that I like to check each morning, and modify as we get more time on the venue to improve our models of the local knowledge. Above is an example from Saint Margaret's Bay in Nova Scotia, where the 2022 49er, 49er FX and Nacra 17 World Championships were held. After checking the forecast for the day, part of the morning routine for the teams that I was coaching at this event was to review our previous notes from the expected wind direction. Given that we saw a different direction almost every day, this was a very important exercise to help refresh our memories of what had worked the last time we saw the forecasted wind direction. At the end of each day, we added notes on how that day had played out to improve the Callbook.

Once you have your preliminary Callbook constructed, you'll be able to use the tool to help make difficult decisions when other advantages are more subtle. Let's walk through how we adjust the betting odds on a day of racing in a North Westerly breeze on Biscayne Bay in Miami.

When low pressure systems bring winter cold fronts through Miami, it is common to get one to three days of South Westerly breeze, becoming Westerly and then slowly shifting right to become North Westerly and eventually Northerly on Biscayne Bay. In the North Westerly, the wind blowing through the city often creates very shifty and very puffy wind, with super flat water close to land, and steep, tight chop as you get farther South East towards Key Biscayne. Looking upwind, the race course is often very visual because the puffs are so much bigger than the lulls, which creates either a "connect-the-dots'' type of day if the differential between puffs and lulls are big enough, or an "edge out" type of day, if the pressure differences are a bit smaller. We'll get into this a lot more later in part 2, but for the sake of this example, let's say that the puffs are around 17 knots, and the lulls are down to 14 - a significant difference, but not enough to outweigh the importance of the shifts that often accompany the pressure changes rolling off the shoreline. As a result, in this example, we're going to play this race as the "edge out" type of day. Once we have identified the type of day, the next step is to decide on how to hedge our bets. This is where the Miami Callbook and the Wind Strategy mechanics come in.

What we know from the mechanics of the wind, is that we expect to see a left shift in the wind over land, so in the case of the NW'ly, offshore breeze in Miami, we expect to see more left angle as we get closer to the land at the top of the course, and more right angle towards the bottom. In addition, in a gradient wind, we expect to see more pressure farther from shore, and lighter pressure as we get farther away from the city. As we look up the racecourse at a puffy, shifty race track, it might not be immediately apparent whether the right or left will pay, but knowing that the wind is theoretically left shifted closer to the top, I would likely shift my betting odds slightly to a, "60:40 left favored," bet before doing any testing.

On the other hand, the exact wind direction might factor in in terms of which tack might keep us in pressure longer. Depending on where your course is set, the shoreline axis might change a little bit, but in our example, let's say that our course is set about a mile east of the Coconut Grove Sailing Club, where the shoreline axis is approximately 200°. Early in the cold front, the wind direction might be left of perpendicular to that axis (i.e. left of 290°), and if this is the case, Port will take us closer to land sooner, potentially taking us out of pressure due to our theoretical expectation about more pressure offshore in gradient winds. Starboard will keep us offshore for longer, so in this case, maybe we modify the betting odds to favor the left a little bit more than our previous assessment: maybe instead of, "60:40 left," we adjust our bet to "65:35 left." What we're essentially saying here is that while we expect both sides to be in play, the left might have a decent edge over the course of the day.

What I like to tell sailors that I'm coaching on this type of day is that it's likely a day where it seems random in the moment because of the puffy shifty conditions, but when you look back on the day as a whole, you'll often realize that the left was actually pretty strong on average, and that teams who played the right had to work harder and be more precise about connecting the dots to come out ahead. This mindset will keep you open to opportunities from either side, but will help you settle the low margin decisions with more confidence than you might otherwise have.

As the cold front progresses through Miami, the wind ticks slowly to the right. Often this shift is too slow to matter over an hour long race, but what it does change is how the wind axis relates to the shoreline axis. As the wind gets to the right of perpendicular to the shoreline axis, now Starboard tack takes us closer to land sooner, and Port theoretically keeps us in more wind for longer. In this case, we need to shift our betting odds back in the opposite direction: instead of, "65:35 left", now the theoretical odds change to, "55:45 right." This is a much tighter margin, so your conviction in one side should probably be weaker, and other factors might be more likely to sway your decision making.

One of the most important advantages that top teams take advantage of in these tight margin races is the psychological confidence that comes from knowing that either side could come  in, and that often times the best you can do is to win your side and hope the final shift and puff go your way. This makes it easier to shake it off and focus on the next play when things go wrong. Sometimes we talk about needing to be a "goldfish" with a short memory on these days.

This should not mean that we abandon our type of day strategy to try to sail up the middle of the course because we're not sure which side will pay! Instead, it means that we should stick to our guns - bet on edging out left, and play our strategy well. If the right comes in at the top, chances are pretty good that the left won't be far behind and that the top 10 teams will include boats from either side who "won their side." An added benefit is that often this means that fewer teams will be tempted to fight hard for the pin end, because they don't see a strong reason to bet on the left. This can make the "edge out left" strategy easier for you to execute!

In this example that I gave, I nudged the betting odds 10% left or right due to expected shift geographies (the windward shoreline) - particularly because I have experience racing in Miami where I've seen this situation play out many times. I adjusted the odds 5% due to theoretical pressure differences due to the shoreline axis (port took us a bit closer to shore than starboard when TWD was left of 290°, but not a LOT closer).

After adjusting the theoretical odds, the next step would be to actually test those odds on the course. Warming up before the race I'd be looking for evidence to confirm or reject the mental model and betting odds that we've generated so far. The modification here might be an overall adjustment of 5% one way or the other based on general confidence, or it might be 5% one way or another on an individual factor like pressure based on a visual observation or a compass confirmation. For example, if I can visually confirm more pressure offshore, I might increase that component of my bet. If I see the opposite of what I expect, it might negate the theoretical bet completely, or even swing it in the opposite direction if I'm confident enough in what my eyes are telling me.

At the end of the day, how you adjust the betting odds on your boat might vary - you might treat every factor with equal weight or you might be a little bit less quantitative and more abstract. Over time, no matter how you adjust the betting odds, practicing this system of strategic hedging will improve your ability to understand how different factors will impact racing, and will improve your confidence when playing the game against other tacticians!

Smaller margins in the betting odds may also modify your plan B gameplan, which is extremely important to articulate. Once again let's consider our example of the Miami North Westerly where we have narrowed our odds to 55:45 left. In this example we're dealing with a 10 percentage point spread - 55% left to 45% right. This is a pretty small margin when betting on a particular side of the course to play, and below a certain point, if a bad start makes it easier to execute your "type of day" strategy on the other side of the course, you might consider taking it.

With the edge out type of day, the main pillar of the racing style is getting to an outside edge of your group. Let's say we wanted to edge out left, but at the start we end up too shy on layline to the pin end, and are forced to tack and duck a big portion of the fleet. Initially our plan B will be to find a decent lane back left to start working our way towards that outside left edge of the group as we discussed earlier. But in a tight fleet, there's a decent chance that a lot of boats come off the line with good lanes, and by the time we find a lane back left, we find ourselves to the right of 70% of the fleet. In this circumstance, if the spread on our betting odds were big - let's say 65:35 left - we might still consider taking the lane back left to do our best to work that side. On the other hand, the closer we get to 50:50 odds, the more likely we might be to abandon the left, and instead focus on edging out to the right of the fleet.

Knowing when to switch the plan B is a bit of an art depending on where you are in the fleet, what type of day you think it is, starting line bias, what you've decided on as your betting odds, and how likely you think you are to be able to execute the type of day strategy on the other side. As you start to implement this system, the best rule of thumb is to err on the side of caution by trusting your original evaluation. If you thought the left was slightly favored, bet on the left and vice versa. This will ensure that you have a more reliable data point to debrief on and learn from after the race. The more you practice, however, the better you'll get at recognizing the moments when small spreads and potential line bias present the opportunity to switch your plan B to control the other side of the course than you were originally planning.

This venue based model for adjusting the betting odds is a great way to build a big picture understanding of where you're going to go race, but in the next chapter we're going to zoom in one level to look at an individual day of racing, to understand how we can utilize the weather forecast to improve our betting odds even more.
