Second, learn to identify which escape routes apply to your gameplan and which do not. If you think one side is heavily favored, it's probably not a great plan to tack away from the favored side and continue across to the opposite corner in search of clear air. On the other hand, if you felt that the breeze was fairly uniform across the course, maybe the escape route does differ from the side that you were originally planning on heading towards. In the next few sections we'll be digging into this to identify the escape routes for five different types of days. If you can come away with a systematic plan for how to execute your gameplan when you've had a plan B or C start, you'll be able to keep your confidence high and focus on the factors that matter after a compromised start.

At the end of the day, one of the best things that you can do to improve your bailouts is to practice doing it! This is often a neglected focus during practices because it's so much easier to train in clear air, ideal situations, but once you realize that even the top teams spend the majority of their races digging back from compromised starts, the importance of this skill set should be clear.

An interesting example of two different way of hedging bets can be seen by comparing the starting strategies of the winners of the 2022 49er Worlds, with the starting strategies of the winners of the 2020 49er Worlds.

At the 2020 49er Worlds in Australia, Pete Burling and Blaire Tuke won the regatta with about ⅓ plan A starts, ⅓ plan B starts, and ⅓ plan C starts. They often hedged their bets by choosing low traffic positions on the starting line, where they could get off clean in the front pack, and work through the fleet from there.

In contrast, at the 2022 World Championship in Canada, Bart Lambriex and Floris van de Werken took a much more aggressive approach to starting, pushing their starting positions closer to the ends of the line, and taking more risk. In 14 races, they had about 43% plan A starts, 43% plan C starts and only about 14% plan B starts. This was much closer to the Ricky Bobby mentality of starting, but they were exceptionally good at selecting lanes to bail out into, and very disciplined about sticking to their game plan after the bailout. This allowed them to win more races outright than Pete and Blair, which made up for the bad races.

This is a good illustration of two different hedging strategies applied extremely well. Both of these teams knew how much risk they were willing to take, and how to battle back when they didn't come off the line in the plan A lane.

Which hedging strategy is better? This will depend on the fleet that you're sailing in and where you find your strengths and weaknesses to be. In many cases, I tend to think that the best approach to hedging is the one that less of the fleet is comfortable with. If everyone focuses on minimizing risk by staying out of traffic, the top teams will all migrate towards the middle of the line making it easier to win the pin if you decide to fight the fight! On the other hand, if the top teams are all counting on their plan B and C execution to get them out of trouble when their aggressive starting strategies go wrong, you'll have more of those top teams taking high risk positions, and the risk might go up even more than usual.

On the other hand, some tacticians believe in the opposite: they think that sticking with the top players is the high percentage move, because if you're doing the same thing as the other top teams, it comes down to who executes best. One of my coaches growing up recommended a strategy that he called, "Polling the players." The idea was to keep one eye on where the other top teams were setting up on the line, and when in doubt, to crowdsource decision making by starting near the other good teams.

One other factor that might determine whether you hedge risk or consequence is what factors are driving your decision making. In cases where one side of the course is favored, but the line is square, hedging based on risk by finding the low traffic location is likely a better choice because the whole fleet will start on the same ladder rung, so there will be fewer opportunities to find sneaky lanes to live in when executing the plan B or C strategies. When the starting line is skewed, more opportunities present themselves for plan B and C teams who know what to look for.

Ultimately, as the 49er Worlds example shows, there are a range of strategies that can work. The work that you have to do as a team is practicing where to take risk, and where to be conservative to create a risk profile that works out over the course of a whole regatta. With the information that we've discussed here, you'll be well equipped to have these discussions as a team after each race, each day of sailing and each regatta to adjust your risk taking over time.

We've focused a lot on starting line bets here because that's the first bet you'll need to make when deciding your gameplan for a race, but this same idea can be applied to upwind positioning, downwind positioning, mark rounding decisions, and more around the race course. In the next section we're going to look at five types of days, and we'll dissect the decision making process on each part of the course. See if you can identify the hedges that we make on each section to ensure that we're ultimately making high percentage decisions for the conditions of the day.
