In contrast to thermal winds, gradient driven wind is far more dynamic. Pressure systems moving through the atmosphere impact each other constantly, changing timing, trajectory and intensity. In addition, local factors like heating determine how much mixing occurs between atmospheric layers, changing how gradient wind mixes down to the surface. Let's briefly look at some of those mechanics to understand why gradient wind is less stable than thermal wind, and then dig into how we can use this information to help improve our approach to racing on gradient days.

When we talk about gradient wind, the wind that we race in is the "surface level gradient" next to the water, but to understand how gradient wind changes over the course of the day, it is important to understand that wind speed and direction change a lot with relation to elevation. On windy.com, checking the 100m gradient, 300m gradient and 600m gradient can give you an idea of what is happening higher above sea level, and as a result, what might make it down to the surface if the atmospheric layers begin to mix.

When temperatures are cold, atmospheric stratification occurs, creating a situation where different layers of wind can become very compartmentalized. This often happens overnight. Heating however can create vertical columns of air movement much in the same way that heating causes air to rise in a thermal breeze. The main difference here however, is that the vertical movement is more random. Imagine a situation where relatively calm air at the surface rises into a higher atmospheric layer where the gradient is moving at 20 knots. This calm air accelerates into the higher layer, but leaves a vacuum where it came from. If the wind aloft is moving at 20 knots, it is unlikely to experience enough cooling to fall to the surface, reverse direction and complete a thermal circulation, but it might drop into the lower pressure zone created by the rising surface air. For our purposes as racers, this essentially creates random columns of rising and falling air, all moving in similar directions, but with highly variable velocities, or "puffy" conditions.

In addition to velocity differences aloft, the wind direction is often different higher in the air column than it is at the surface. We call this phenomenon, "wind shear." On average, wind higher up is often right shifted in the northern hemisphere relative to wind at the surface due to more friction with the land surface down low - a result of the coriolis effect. This means that as mixing occurs, the wind from aloft might bring right shifted, puffs on average. This depends a lot on the pressure system however, so two tricks for determining wind shear are (1) looking at the movement of the clouds aloft to see what direction they are moving relative to the surface wind, and (2) checking the windy.com forecast for gradient wind direction at the surface level, 100m level and 300m level. If you see variation of more than 10°-15° forecasted, this might be a good indication of significant wind shear.

On days where you expect wind shear, work hard to figure out if the puffs on the water are related to a specific wind direction - for example, if puffs bring right shift while lulls bring left shift. On puffy, shifty days, this can sometimes be a subtle but important factor that can create a small margin advantage to bet on.

If pressure is associated with a specific direction, the rule of thumb to remember is that it will be easier to come out of that side. This is because you will have more opportunities to cross back to the center, towards your opponents on a lifted puff. This can be factored into your game plan by nudging your betting odds a few percentage points in the direction of the expected puff direction.

Because this phenomenon most often occurs on very puffy, shifty days it can be quite challenging to pick up on, even if you're looking for it. As a coach, if I'm seeing wind shear in the clouds, and seeing wind shear in the forecast, the line that I like to use with my sailors is, "This is the type of day where both sides look good at times, and both sides look bad at times, but at the end of the day when you look back on the racing, you realize that if you had bet on the side with wind shear aloft, it was quite strong on average." The more you do your homework to determine wind shear, the more you'll start to notice the impact that it has, especially on small margin days, and the more confident you'll be in nudging your bet towards the 100m wind direction.

Gradient winds are generally puffier, shiftier and harder to predict than thermally driven winds. Often, either side can win because shifts will make both sides strong at least once in a beat. These are the days where one team might come off the water thinking that the left worked all day long, and another team might come in thinking that the right was the place to be. The reality in these situations is often that "right" versus "left" is the wrong construct for thinking about what paid. Instead, success is more about leading into either side so that when the shift happens to put your side of the course ahead, you can come back at the fleet looking strong. I like to tell teams that on these days, "Leading to the first feature on your side is important."

One metric that I like to track during racing, is how many of the top 10 teams come from the left and how many come from the right side of the course. In a thermal wind, if the right side is favored, the split will often be dramatic - 70% or more of the lead pack will come from the same side of the course on average. In contrast, gradient days will often be much closer.

Two important takeaways come from this. The first is that on gradient days, it's more likely that you can make either side of the course work. The second is that the advantage on gradient days is a much smaller margin than on thermal days, so we need to be very perceptive to pick up on the average advantage.

On day one of the 2022 Viper North American Championship, the top team was extremely fast, winning 4 out of 4 races on a gradient driven day by playing into the left side of the course early in each race and coming back on the first big left shift. At the debrief later that day, they concluded that the left was strong, and that this was why they won the day. Zooming out however, in the top 10, 57%  of the top 10 teams came from the right with only 43% coming from the left.  The takeaway here is that both sides worked - top teams came from the left, and top teams came from the right. If the left won every race, it obviously wasn't bad! On average however,  the right had a 14% edge over the left in that top group.

If the regatta leaders had played the opposite side well, it's likely that they would have still won every race. On the other hand, it would be easy for a team who finished 5th on the day by playing the right to draw the conclusion that they were on the wrong side of the course if they don't have the ability to zoom out and see all of the factors at play. If you have the benefit of a coach on the water, this is a great data point for them to keep track of, and if not, one factor you'll want to discuss at the end of each race in addition to what paid, is how important it was to bet on a side versus playing the edge out strategy well.

One of the things that makes sailing such a challenging and interesting sport is that in some races you make all the right decisions and lose, while in others you make all the wrong decisions and win. Keeping your strategic learning curve steep requires you to try to distinguish between these two situations and everything in between. The top tacticians are constantly asking, "Was I focused on the right factors?" "How would I know to shift my focus in the future?" "Did the people who beat me predict what was going to happen better than I did? Did they just deal with uncertainty in a smarter way?" And finally, "How can I adjust my decision making system to do it better in the future?" If you put the work in to understand the forecast ahead of time, you will better understand the factors at play, and get more out of each debrief to help refine your decision making process over time.
