Making Your Bet: Incorporating Forecasts Into Decision Making

Every day of the 2021 J70 World Championship in Marina Del Rey, Dave Ullman arrived at Maxwell's Cafe like clockwork with his first few coffees deleted, and a paper printout of the day's forecast to pass around the table. Dave is a legend in so many areas of the sport, and he is religious about checking the forecast ahead of time to try to understand the impact that it will have on the day of racing.

On the flip side of the coin is Olympic Gold medalist, Kevin Burnham, who legend has it, went racing every day without a forecast, instead preferring to wake up and smell the wind - feel it on his face - without preconceptions to bias his view of what he was seeing develop, and watching on the race course.

The difference in mindset between these two top sailors illustrates dramatic differences between some of the best sailors in the world, and highlights the fact that the advantage that can be gained from a forecast is a subtle and fickle factor in decision making. On formula race days where the same game plan works over and over again, a forecast might help to identify the important factors early in the day, build the confidence needed to commit to the game plan in race one, and identify when those factors might stop working. On the other hand, in inshore buoy racing, granularity matters, and when forecasts take a big picture view that conflicts with the micro level wind shifts and pressure differences that we see in an hour long race, they can distract and confuse, obscuring the type of day and the priorities that really matter.

One trick that Dave Ullman uses is that he always uses the same forecaster - someone who he trusts to get it right - and he trusts them completely until the first sign that the forecast is wrong, at which point he throws it out completely for the given day.

In just the last few years however, forecasting technology has improved so quickly, and online tools have provided access to so many free data sets and forecasting models, that for tacticians willing to get into the nuts and bolts, it is possible to pull back the curtains around professional level forecasting and improve the decision making process. The goal here is to take advantage of the insights that a forecast might offer, while being more tuned into when those forecasts might get things wrong. This fits very nicely into our betting odds model, so let's look at how we can drill down another level to make our race course decisions more robust.

When many sailors check the forecast in the morning, the first three things that often come to mind are, "Are we going to have 'nice' conditions for racing today?" "What is the wind going to be like for the rest of the regatta?" And, "What should I pack for clothes today?" As a coach, my goal is to shift these priorities. I want my athletes to eventually be relaxed in any conditions, and to feel like any conditions are "nice" conditions to go racing! I want them to focus on the things that they can control, and let go of things that they can't, such as what the wind is going to do later in the week. As for the question of wardrobe, I believe that the philosophy should be, "Bring it all, every day and focus on what matters." The more you understand how to derive real, valuable information from the forecast, the more your gear selection becomes an afterthought...

The first question that should come to mind every day when you see the forecast is, "What type of day do we expect to see on the race course?" We are going to discuss how to ue the forecast to help answer this question soon, but for now we'll focus on how we can use the forecast to start to understand what is driving the wind on our race course, how these observations can be appplied to anticipate the characteristics of the breeze, and ultimately how this should shape our strategic thinking.

The first tool that I use each day when checking the wind is PredictWind because personally I have had a lot of good experience with their proprietary forecasting models - PWE (a modified version of the European model) and PWG (a modified version of the GFS model). SailFlow is another great tool, espeically for those racing primarilly in the United States.

No matter what tool you use, most modern forecasting tools will show a range of forecasting models, so step one is to see what the different models say, and start developing an idea of which ones to trust. Below is a super simplified list of models that I like to look at, and my understanding of how each model is biased. This is a field that is constantly changing, and one that I am constantly learning about, so full disclosure here: I recommend doing your own research into the models available on your forecasting service, how they work, and what factors they are optimized to predict.

Ultimately, checking all of the models for agreement, and then focusing on the ones that you think will be most relevant for the day and the venue that you'll be racing in can help to understand how much stock to put in each model.

As you look at the forecast, the first question that I like to ask is, "Are we expecting a thermal or a gradient wind?" I've used the term on a number of occasions already, but let's quickly review the difference between thermal circulations, and gradient driven wind. Again, Wind Strategy covers this topic in more detail, so the following section is meant more as a review. If you're new to the idea, go read Wind Strategy!

Gradient wind is driven by large scale atmospheric pressure systems creating areas of high and low pressure, which drive air movement across the globe. In contrast, thermal wind is driven by more localized temperature differences that drive closed circulations. When you hear weather forecasters talking about high pressure, low pressure, cold fronts, warm fronts, or these types of weather phenomena, these are drivers of the gradient, whereas a local sea breeze is an example of a thermal.

An important thing to understand about gradient wind, is that it varies depending on elevation in the atmosphere. A low pressure system moving over Florida may be characterized by very strong winds 600 meters above sea level, and strong winds 300 meters above sea level, but under certain circumstances, this wind may not mix down to the surface of the water where we race. In this case, we often say that, "The gradient wind is weak," because in sailing we're concerned mainly with the surface gradient, even though it is windy higher up in the atmosphere. When we know that we're racing in a gradient wind, we want a forecast that gives us an idea of what the wind is doing within the first 600 meters of the surface, because we can use that information to try to predict how the wind might change if mixing in the atmosphere increases.

Thermal Wind

Thermally driven wind generally refers to more localized wind patterns, driven by a cycle of diurnal heating and cooling. In Southern California this is a common weather pattern thanks to the dramatic heating and cooling of the inland deserts each day. Heating inland causes air to rise. In areas with enough moisture in the atmosphere this often appears in the form of cumulus cloud development. The rising air creates low pressure close to the ground, sucking in cooler surrounding air. As the cool air gets sucked in, higher level air subsides to take its place. The subsidence pulls the upper level air in what we call, "counterflow," drawing in the air that previously rose due to heating. This cycle of heating, counterflow, and subsidence, sucking cooler surrounding air in creates a circulation that grows and grows, building in strength as heating continues.

This thermal circulation requires two things: (1) at least three degrees celsius of temperature differential between the water and the land, and (2) calm upper level gradient wind. To understand if thermal development may impact your race course, start by checking temperature differentials between the water on the venue and nearby inland cities. If the differential is at least 3 degrees celsius, next check the gradient wind forecasts. For this, I like to use windy.com to check the surface level wind (use the slider in the bottom right corner of the screen to ensure that "surface" is selected) on the European model at 8am in the morning, as well as the 100m and 300m level winds. If these are all less than about 7 knots, this sets the stage for thermal development. Direction of this gradient wind also matters as discussed in Wind Strategy's section on quadrant analysis. Essentially, gradient wind at the 100m and 300m levels that promote counterflow can help to facilitate thermal development as long as it doesn't overpower the subsidence.
