Investigating these factors can help to understand if there is potential for thermal development, and knowing this will help you to identify the thermal component if it starts to happen. Ultimately however, localized conditions can be difficult to predict because they depend on dynamic conditions like cloud cover, sun angle and more. Keep in mind that the rules of thumb given above are just the starting place. More temperature differential and more favorable upper level gradient will increase the likelihood of a stronger thermal. If three degrees of temperature differential is enough to drive a thermal on a day with a 2-3 knot gradient aiding counterflow aloft, a 6 knot temperature differential might be able to overcome worse counterflow conditions, or might drive a stronger thermal given the same favorable conditions aloft.

One of the best signs to look for to help identify developing thermal circulations is the appearance of cumulus clouds over land. Cumulus clouds indicate moist air rising to a level where the temperature drop causes the moisture to condense into clouds. While dry environments like California may not always have enough moisture in the air for this phenomenon to occur, if there is enough moisture, this will be one of the first signs to look for to identify strong enough to influence the wind.

One common misconception that I hear repeated often is that if the wind is from the same direction as the thermal in the morning, that it will add to the thermal and cause it to be stronger. While this can sometimes be true, the reality is more nuanced. Below is a back and forth that I had with weather guru, Mike Godsey, to help clarify some aspects of the interaction between thermal development and gradient augmentation.

Once you get on the water, a few hints will help you confirm whether the wind is thermal or gradient driven. Wind early in the morning is a sign of gradient, as are cloudy skies, or winds that come with stormy conditions. Thermals generally develop on clear days where heating can occur as the sun gets higher in the sky. Thermals generally fill from the shoreline out towards the water, with the strongest wind on the shoreline, whereas gradients fill from the water first, in towards the beach with the maximum pressure offshore. There are plenty of exceptions to these generalizations, but knowing the factors to look for can help to confirm what you're seeing.

The toughest days to tell apart are often light gradients and light thermals. Light thermals are often driven by small temperature differentials, so when you check the forecasts in the morning, you might see a 2-3 degree temperature difference followed by a 6-9 knot afternoon wind. This wind could be a building gradient mixing down to the surface from higher levels, or it could be a light thermal circulation. On these days, getting eyes on the water early to watch the wind fill in can help to tell the difference.

In Marina Del Rey, one sign that you're seeing a light thermal fill is that the harbor channel will show good wind - a "Harbor Hurricane" - while everything else is dead calm. You might start sailing out to the race course, only to exit the jetty into glassy water. Making the distinction can help you predict whether the wind will present a stable oscillation, or whether you should expect a more random, puffy shifty racing style. Next we'll look at how to use your forecast to select the strategic "type of day."

The basis for the five types of day that we mentioned earlier, is the randomness and the variance between two factors - pressure and shift. These factors are often (though not always) closely related to the type of wind that we expect to see, so once we answer the question, "Thermal or gradient?" we can start to predict how the day might play out.

With a thermal wind, generally we expect to see less random variation in both pressure and shift. The extreme example of this might be days where you can almost set your watch to time the oscillations in wind shifts. When we get these conditions, shifts will last a predictable amount of time, and the amplitude of the shifts will fall within a predictable range. Five to ten degrees of oscillation every five to fifteen minutes is a common thermal pattern. The exact timing and size of the shifts will depend largely on the heating source for the thermal circulation: how far it is from the race area, how easily it heats and cools, and other atmospheric factors impacting the circulation development. Ground cover, slope angle of the heating area, and moisture in the soil might all be examples of factors that would impact heating, and therefore determine how pressure and shift change thoughout the day. What is important to understand here, is that a set of physical factors driving the wind will determine the variations in shifts and pressure changes, and these physical factors do not change over the course of a race day, so there will be less variation in wind conditions.

On a thermal day, it is common to see patterns change slowly around the hours of peak heating (generally 2-3pm), and more quickly as temperatures change more dramatically early in the day or late in the afternoon. If we see a thermal shift pattern persist over the course of an hour or two in the afternoon, and then the wind goes outside of this range - maybe we see a left shift falling five degrees outside of the wind range from the previous two hours - it might be a strong sign that the temperature differential driving the thermal is changing, and we can expect to see more trend in that direction.

A classic example of this is in Long Beach, California which is well known for the consistent thermally driven sea breeze during the summer. In Long Beach, we often arrive at the venue in the morning to a light southerly flow from around 180°S. This light gradient wind is driven by a low pressure system sitting over California. The light gradient wind, paired with intense desert heating inland from Long Beach create ideal conditions for thermal development. During the light morning gradient, racing often occurs in random, shifty conditions, with slightly more pressure farther from shore. Around noon however, flicks of right shift will begin to influence the race course.

When the thermal begins to fill in, the wind will quickly shift right to 200°, 210° and then 220° over the course of an hour, settling in to a long, tight oscillation. Depending on heating, the right shift can continue slowly over the next few hours to get as far right as 235°. As discussed in the segment by Mike Godsey above, this max pressure, and max right angle is likely driven by the Pacific High gradient connecting with the thermal wind later in the day.

As the land starts to cool however, the thermal effects begin to fade, and flicks of left angle might offer a warning that the stable racing conditions are about to give way to a relatively quick, persistent left shift, back to the low pressure gradient angle of 180°. Tuning into these momentary deviations outside of the typical range can help you to hedge your bets, and start preparing for a new racing condition.

On thermal days, geographic effects will often be magnified in importance, because other factors are minimized. In Santa Barbara, California, the summer sea breeze often builds around 12 or 1pm, bringing very stable wind from the West. In general, this wind exhibits almost no oscillation, with uniform pressure across the race area. In this case, the geographic impacts become the primary feature of the race course, because a small advantage gained from sailing in less current near shore, or a slight geographic wind shift around Ledbetter Point outweigh the nearly non-existent thermal oscillations. If you have ever sailed in Santa Barbara, you know that local knowledge is "go right" when the thermal is in!

Because of these characteristics of thermal wind, the most common types of day to see during a thermal are (1) Inside Track days where we want to stay in phase with a predicatble windshift by leading packs into the next shift, and (2) Place To Race To days where one side continues to pay. We will talk about both of these types far mor later in this section. Whether we see an Inside Track day or a Place To Race To day  in the thermal often depends on the size and length of the shifts as well as the surrounding geography. Margins are fairly large between teams who get it right, and teams who get it wrong, so going out early to figure out what range the wind is in, and how often it is shifting will pay dividends on these days. The more homework you do here, the higher your confidence should become, and the better you should be able to predict what is coming next.

Hedge your bets around transitional periods early in the day or late in the day, when temperatures are changing quickly, and the thermal circulation is changing rapidly, but once you get into the thermal conditions trust your homework. Look for shifts outside of the expected range to help you understand when you are in this timeframe or not.

Gradient Wind
