Making Your Bet: Incorporating Forecasts Into Decision Making

Every day of the 2021 J70 World Championship in Marina Del Rey, Dave Ullman arrived at Maxwell's Cafe like clockwork with his first few coffees deleted, and a paper printout of the day's forecast to pass around the table. Dave is a legend in so many areas of the sport, and he is religious about checking the forecast ahead of time to try to understand the impact that it will have on the day of racing.

On the flip side of the coin is Olympic Gold medalist, Kevin Burnham, who legend has it, went racing every day without a forecast, instead preferring to wake up and smell the wind - feel it on his face - without preconceptions to bias his view of what he was seeing develop, and watching on the race course.

The difference in mindset between these two top sailors illustrates dramatic differences between some of the best sailors in the world, and highlights the fact that the advantage that can be gained from a forecast is a subtle and fickle factor in decision making. On formula race days where the same game plan works over and over again, a forecast might help to identify the important factors early in the day, build the confidence needed to commit to the game plan in race one, and identify when those factors might stop working. On the other hand, in inshore buoy racing, granularity matters, and when forecasts take a big picture view that conflicts with the micro level wind shifts and pressure differences that we see in an hour long race, they can distract and confuse, obscuring the type of day and the priorities that really matter.

One trick that Dave Ullman uses is that he always uses the same forecaster - someone who he trusts to get it right - and he trusts them completely until the first sign that the forecast is wrong, at which point he throws it out completely for the given day.

In just the last few years however, forecasting technology has improved so quickly, and online tools have provided access to so many free data sets and forecasting models, that for tacticians willing to get into the nuts and bolts, it is possible to pull back the curtains around professional level forecasting and improve the decision making process. The goal here is to take advantage of the insights that a forecast might offer, while being more tuned into when those forecasts might get things wrong. This fits very nicely into our betting odds model, so let's look at how we can drill down another level to make our race course decisions more robust.

When many sailors check the forecast in the morning, the first three things that often come to mind are, "Are we going to have 'nice' conditions for racing today?" "What is the wind going to be like for the rest of the regatta?" And, "What should I pack for clothes today?" As a coach, my goal is to shift these priorities. I want my athletes to eventually be relaxed in any conditions, and to feel like any conditions are "nice" conditions to go racing! I want them to focus on the things that they can control, and let go of things that they can't, such as what the wind is going to do later in the week. As for the question of wardrobe, I believe that the philosophy should be, "Bring it all, every day and focus on what matters." The more you understand how to derive real, valuable information from the forecast, the more your gear selection becomes an afterthought...

The first question that should come to mind every day when you see the forecast is, "What type of day do we expect to see on the race course?" We are going to discuss how to ue the forecast to help answer this question soon, but for now we'll focus on how we can use the forecast to start to understand what is driving the wind on our race course, how these observations can be appplied to anticipate the characteristics of the breeze, and ultimately how this should shape our strategic thinking.

The first tool that I use each day when checking the wind is PredictWind because personally I have had a lot of good experience with their proprietary forecasting models - PWE (a modified version of the European model) and PWG (a modified version of the GFS model). SailFlow is another great tool, espeically for those racing primarilly in the United States.

No matter what tool you use, most modern forecasting tools will show a range of forecasting models, so step one is to see what the different models say, and start developing an idea of which ones to trust. Below is a super simplified list of models that I like to look at, and my understanding of how each model is biased. This is a field that is constantly changing, and one that I am constantly learning about, so full disclosure here: I recommend doing your own research into the models available on your forecasting service, how they work, and what factors they are optimized to predict.

Ultimately, checking all of the models for agreement, and then focusing on the ones that you think will be most relevant for the day and the venue that you'll be racing in can help to understand how much stock to put in each model.

As you look at the forecast, the first question that I like to ask is, "Are we expecting a thermal or a gradient wind?" I've used the term on a number of occasions already, but let's quickly review the difference between thermal circulations, and gradient driven wind. Again, Wind Strategy covers this topic in more detail, so the following section is meant more as a review. If you're new to the idea, go read Wind Strategy!

Gradient wind is driven by large scale atmospheric pressure systems creating areas of high and low pressure, which drive air movement across the globe. In contrast, thermal wind is driven by more localized temperature differences that drive closed circulations. When you hear weather forecasters talking about high pressure, low pressure, cold fronts, warm fronts, or these types of weather phenomena, these are drivers of the gradient, whereas a local sea breeze is an example of a thermal.

An important thing to understand about gradient wind, is that it varies depending on elevation in the atmosphere. A low pressure system moving over Florida may be characterized by very strong winds 600 meters above sea level, and strong winds 300 meters above sea level, but under certain circumstances, this wind may not mix down to the surface of the water where we race. In this case, we often say that, "The gradient wind is weak," because in sailing we're concerned mainly with the surface gradient, even though it is windy higher up in the atmosphere. When we know that we're racing in a gradient wind, we want a forecast that gives us an idea of what the wind is doing within the first 600 meters of the surface, because we can use that information to try to predict how the wind might change if mixing in the atmosphere increases.

Thermal Wind

Thermally driven wind generally refers to more localized wind patterns, driven by a cycle of diurnal heating and cooling. In Southern California this is a common weather pattern thanks to the dramatic heating and cooling of the inland deserts each day. Heating inland causes air to rise. In areas with enough moisture in the atmosphere this often appears in the form of cumulus cloud development. The rising air creates low pressure close to the ground, sucking in cooler surrounding air. As the cool air gets sucked in, higher level air subsides to take its place. The subsidence pulls the upper level air in what we call, "counterflow," drawing in the air that previously rose due to heating. This cycle of heating, counterflow, and subsidence, sucking cooler surrounding air in creates a circulation that grows and grows, building in strength as heating continues.

This thermal circulation requires two things: (1) at least three degrees celsius of temperature differential between the water and the land, and (2) calm upper level gradient wind. To understand if thermal development may impact your race course, start by checking temperature differentials between the water on the venue and nearby inland cities. If the differential is at least 3 degrees celsius, next check the gradient wind forecasts. For this, I like to use windy.com to check the surface level wind (use the slider in the bottom right corner of the screen to ensure that "surface" is selected) on the European model at 8am in the morning, as well as the 100m and 300m level winds. If these are all less than about 7 knots, this sets the stage for thermal development. Direction of this gradient wind also matters as discussed in Wind Strategy's section on quadrant analysis. Essentially, gradient wind at the 100m and 300m levels that promote counterflow can help to facilitate thermal development as long as it doesn't overpower the subsidence.

Investigating these factors can help to understand if there is potential for thermal development, and knowing this will help you to identify the thermal component if it starts to happen. Ultimately however, localized conditions can be difficult to predict because they depend on dynamic conditions like cloud cover, sun angle and more. Keep in mind that the rules of thumb given above are just the starting place. More temperature differential and more favorable upper level gradient will increase the likelihood of a stronger thermal. If three degrees of temperature differential is enough to drive a thermal on a day with a 2-3 knot gradient aiding counterflow aloft, a 6 knot temperature differential might be able to overcome worse counterflow conditions, or might drive a stronger thermal given the same favorable conditions aloft.

One of the best signs to look for to help identify developing thermal circulations is the appearance of cumulus clouds over land. Cumulus clouds indicate moist air rising to a level where the temperature drop causes the moisture to condense into clouds. While dry environments like California may not always have enough moisture in the air for this phenomenon to occur, if there is enough moisture, this will be one of the first signs to look for to identify strong enough to influence the wind.

One common misconception that I hear repeated often is that if the wind is from the same direction as the thermal in the morning, that it will add to the thermal and cause it to be stronger. While this can sometimes be true, the reality is more nuanced. Below is a back and forth that I had with weather guru, Mike Godsey, to help clarify some aspects of the interaction between thermal development and gradient augmentation.

Once you get on the water, a few hints will help you confirm whether the wind is thermal or gradient driven. Wind early in the morning is a sign of gradient, as are cloudy skies, or winds that come with stormy conditions. Thermals generally develop on clear days where heating can occur as the sun gets higher in the sky. Thermals generally fill from the shoreline out towards the water, with the strongest wind on the shoreline, whereas gradients fill from the water first, in towards the beach with the maximum pressure offshore. There are plenty of exceptions to these generalizations, but knowing the factors to look for can help to confirm what you're seeing.

The toughest days to tell apart are often light gradients and light thermals. Light thermals are often driven by small temperature differentials, so when you check the forecasts in the morning, you might see a 2-3 degree temperature difference followed by a 6-9 knot afternoon wind. This wind could be a building gradient mixing down to the surface from higher levels, or it could be a light thermal circulation. On these days, getting eyes on the water early to watch the wind fill in can help to tell the difference.

In Marina Del Rey, one sign that you're seeing a light thermal fill is that the harbor channel will show good wind - a "Harbor Hurricane" - while everything else is dead calm. You might start sailing out to the race course, only to exit the jetty into glassy water. Making the distinction can help you predict whether the wind will present a stable oscillation, or whether you should expect a more random, puffy shifty racing style. Next we'll look at how to use your forecast to select the strategic "type of day."

The basis for the five types of day that we mentioned earlier, is the randomness and the variance between two factors - pressure and shift. These factors are often (though not always) closely related to the type of wind that we expect to see, so once we answer the question, "Thermal or gradient?" we can start to predict how the day might play out.

With a thermal wind, generally we expect to see less random variation in both pressure and shift. The extreme example of this might be days where you can almost set your watch to time the oscillations in wind shifts. When we get these conditions, shifts will last a predictable amount of time, and the amplitude of the shifts will fall within a predictable range. Five to ten degrees of oscillation every five to fifteen minutes is a common thermal pattern. The exact timing and size of the shifts will depend largely on the heating source for the thermal circulation: how far it is from the race area, how easily it heats and cools, and other atmospheric factors impacting the circulation development. Ground cover, slope angle of the heating area, and moisture in the soil might all be examples of factors that would impact heating, and therefore determine how pressure and shift change thoughout the day. What is important to understand here, is that a set of physical factors driving the wind will determine the variations in shifts and pressure changes, and these physical factors do not change over the course of a race day, so there will be less variation in wind conditions.

On a thermal day, it is common to see patterns change slowly around the hours of peak heating (generally 2-3pm), and more quickly as temperatures change more dramatically early in the day or late in the afternoon. If we see a thermal shift pattern persist over the course of an hour or two in the afternoon, and then the wind goes outside of this range - maybe we see a left shift falling five degrees outside of the wind range from the previous two hours - it might be a strong sign that the temperature differential driving the thermal is changing, and we can expect to see more trend in that direction.

A classic example of this is in Long Beach, California which is well known for the consistent thermally driven sea breeze during the summer. In Long Beach, we often arrive at the venue in the morning to a light southerly flow from around 180°S. This light gradient wind is driven by a low pressure system sitting over California. The light gradient wind, paired with intense desert heating inland from Long Beach create ideal conditions for thermal development. During the light morning gradient, racing often occurs in random, shifty conditions, with slightly more pressure farther from shore. Around noon however, flicks of right shift will begin to influence the race course.

When the thermal begins to fill in, the wind will quickly shift right to 200°, 210° and then 220° over the course of an hour, settling in to a long, tight oscillation. Depending on heating, the right shift can continue slowly over the next few hours to get as far right as 235°. As discussed in the segment by Mike Godsey above, this max pressure, and max right angle is likely driven by the Pacific High gradient connecting with the thermal wind later in the day.

As the land starts to cool however, the thermal effects begin to fade, and flicks of left angle might offer a warning that the stable racing conditions are about to give way to a relatively quick, persistent left shift, back to the low pressure gradient angle of 180°. Tuning into these momentary deviations outside of the typical range can help you to hedge your bets, and start preparing for a new racing condition.

On thermal days, geographic effects will often be magnified in importance, because other factors are minimized. In Santa Barbara, California, the summer sea breeze often builds around 12 or 1pm, bringing very stable wind from the West. In general, this wind exhibits almost no oscillation, with uniform pressure across the race area. In this case, the geographic impacts become the primary feature of the race course, because a small advantage gained from sailing in less current near shore, or a slight geographic wind shift around Ledbetter Point outweigh the nearly non-existent thermal oscillations. If you have ever sailed in Santa Barbara, you know that local knowledge is "go right" when the thermal is in!

Because of these characteristics of thermal wind, the most common types of day to see during a thermal are (1) Inside Track days where we want to stay in phase with a predicatble windshift by leading packs into the next shift, and (2) Place To Race To days where one side continues to pay. We will talk about both of these types far mor later in this section. Whether we see an Inside Track day or a Place To Race To day  in the thermal often depends on the size and length of the shifts as well as the surrounding geography. Margins are fairly large between teams who get it right, and teams who get it wrong, so going out early to figure out what range the wind is in, and how often it is shifting will pay dividends on these days. The more homework you do here, the higher your confidence should become, and the better you should be able to predict what is coming next.

Hedge your bets around transitional periods early in the day or late in the day, when temperatures are changing quickly, and the thermal circulation is changing rapidly, but once you get into the thermal conditions trust your homework. Look for shifts outside of the expected range to help you understand when you are in this timeframe or not.

Gradient Wind

In contrast to thermal winds, gradient driven wind is far more dynamic. Pressure systems moving through the atmosphere impact each other constantly, changing timing, trajectory and intensity. In addition, local factors like heating determine how much mixing occurs between atmospheric layers, changing how gradient wind mixes down to the surface. Let's briefly look at some of those mechanics to understand why gradient wind is less stable than thermal wind, and then dig into how we can use this information to help improve our approach to racing on gradient days.

When we talk about gradient wind, the wind that we race in is the "surface level gradient" next to the water, but to understand how gradient wind changes over the course of the day, it is important to understand that wind speed and direction change a lot with relation to elevation. On windy.com, checking the 100m gradient, 300m gradient and 600m gradient can give you an idea of what is happening higher above sea level, and as a result, what might make it down to the surface if the atmospheric layers begin to mix.

When temperatures are cold, atmospheric stratification occurs, creating a situation where different layers of wind can become very compartmentalized. This often happens overnight. Heating however can create vertical columns of air movement much in the same way that heating causes air to rise in a thermal breeze. The main difference here however, is that the vertical movement is more random. Imagine a situation where relatively calm air at the surface rises into a higher atmospheric layer where the gradient is moving at 20 knots. This calm air accelerates into the higher layer, but leaves a vacuum where it came from. If the wind aloft is moving at 20 knots, it is unlikely to experience enough cooling to fall to the surface, reverse direction and complete a thermal circulation, but it might drop into the lower pressure zone created by the rising surface air. For our purposes as racers, this essentially creates random columns of rising and falling air, all moving in similar directions, but with highly variable velocities, or "puffy" conditions.

In addition to velocity differences aloft, the wind direction is often different higher in the air column than it is at the surface. We call this phenomenon, "wind shear." On average, wind higher up is often right shifted in the northern hemisphere relative to wind at the surface due to more friction with the land surface down low - a result of the coriolis effect. This means that as mixing occurs, the wind from aloft might bring right shifted, puffs on average. This depends a lot on the pressure system however, so two tricks for determining wind shear are (1) looking at the movement of the clouds aloft to see what direction they are moving relative to the surface wind, and (2) checking the windy.com forecast for gradient wind direction at the surface level, 100m level and 300m level. If you see variation of more than 10°-15° forecasted, this might be a good indication of significant wind shear.

On days where you expect wind shear, work hard to figure out if the puffs on the water are related to a specific wind direction - for example, if puffs bring right shift while lulls bring left shift. On puffy, shifty days, this can sometimes be a subtle but important factor that can create a small margin advantage to bet on.

If pressure is associated with a specific direction, the rule of thumb to remember is that it will be easier to come out of that side. This is because you will have more opportunities to cross back to the center, towards your opponents on a lifted puff. This can be factored into your game plan by nudging your betting odds a few percentage points in the direction of the expected puff direction.

Because this phenomenon most often occurs on very puffy, shifty days it can be quite challenging to pick up on, even if you're looking for it. As a coach, if I'm seeing wind shear in the clouds, and seeing wind shear in the forecast, the line that I like to use with my sailors is, "This is the type of day where both sides look good at times, and both sides look bad at times, but at the end of the day when you look back on the racing, you realize that if you had bet on the side with wind shear aloft, it was quite strong on average." The more you do your homework to determine wind shear, the more you'll start to notice the impact that it has, especially on small margin days, and the more confident you'll be in nudging your bet towards the 100m wind direction.

Gradient winds are generally puffier, shiftier and harder to predict than thermally driven winds. Often, either side can win because shifts will make both sides strong at least once in a beat. These are the days where one team might come off the water thinking that the left worked all day long, and another team might come in thinking that the right was the place to be. The reality in these situations is often that "right" versus "left" is the wrong construct for thinking about what paid. Instead, success is more about leading into either side so that when the shift happens to put your side of the course ahead, you can come back at the fleet looking strong. I like to tell teams that on these days, "Leading to the first feature on your side is important."

One metric that I like to track during racing, is how many of the top 10 teams come from the left and how many come from the right side of the course. In a thermal wind, if the right side is favored, the split will often be dramatic - 70% or more of the lead pack will come from the same side of the course on average. In contrast, gradient days will often be much closer.

Two important takeaways come from this. The first is that on gradient days, it's more likely that you can make either side of the course work. The second is that the advantage on gradient days is a much smaller margin than on thermal days, so we need to be very perceptive to pick up on the average advantage.

On day one of the 2022 Viper North American Championship, the top team was extremely fast, winning 4 out of 4 races on a gradient driven day by playing into the left side of the course early in each race and coming back on the first big left shift. At the debrief later that day, they concluded that the left was strong, and that this was why they won the day. Zooming out however, in the top 10, 57%  of the top 10 teams came from the right with only 43% coming from the left.  The takeaway here is that both sides worked - top teams came from the left, and top teams came from the right. If the left won every race, it obviously wasn't bad! On average however,  the right had a 14% edge over the left in that top group.

If the regatta leaders had played the opposite side well, it's likely that they would have still won every race. On the other hand, it would be easy for a team who finished 5th on the day by playing the right to draw the conclusion that they were on the wrong side of the course if they don't have the ability to zoom out and see all of the factors at play. If you have the benefit of a coach on the water, this is a great data point for them to keep track of, and if not, one factor you'll want to discuss at the end of each race in addition to what paid, is how important it was to bet on a side versus playing the edge out strategy well.

One of the things that makes sailing such a challenging and interesting sport is that in some races you make all the right decisions and lose, while in others you make all the wrong decisions and win. Keeping your strategic learning curve steep requires you to try to distinguish between these two situations and everything in between. The top tacticians are constantly asking, "Was I focused on the right factors?" "How would I know to shift my focus in the future?" "Did the people who beat me predict what was going to happen better than I did? Did they just deal with uncertainty in a smarter way?" And finally, "How can I adjust my decision making system to do it better in the future?" If you put the work in to understand the forecast ahead of time, you will better understand the factors at play, and get more out of each debrief to help refine your decision making process over time.
